£ÉÉ®iÉ BÉEÉ ºÉÆÉÊ´ÉvÉÉxÉ
[1 , 2024 ]
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA[As on 1st May, 2024]
2024
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT, OFFICIAL LANGUAGES WING
PREFACE
This is the sixth pocket size edition of the Constitution of
India in the diglot form. In this edition, the text of the
Constitution of India has been brought up-to-date by
incorporating therein all the amendments up to the Constitution
(One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023. The foot notes
below the text indicate the Constitution Amendment Acts by
which such amendments have been made.
The Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015
containing details of acquired and transferred territories
between the Governments of India and Bangladesh has been
provided in Appendix I.
The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir)
Order, 2019 and the declaration under article 370(3) of the
Constitution have been provided respectively in Appendix II and
Appendix III for reference.
New Delhi; Dr. Rajiv Mani,
1
st May, 2024 Secretary to the Government of India.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED
Art., arts. .................................................... for Article, articles.
Cl., cls. .................................................... Clause, clauses.
C.O. .................................................... Constitution Order.
Ins. ................................................... Inserted.
P., pp. .................................................... Page, pages.
Pt. .................................................... Part.
Rep. .................................................... Repealed.
Ss., ss. ...................................................... Section, sections.
Sch. .................................................... Schedule.
Subs. .................................................... Substituted.
w.e.f. .................................................... with effect from.
w.r.e.f. .................................................. with retrospective effect from.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA____________ CONTENTS
__________
 PREAMBLE
PART I
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY
ARTICLES
1. Name and territory of the Union.
 2. Admission or establishment of new States.
[2A. Sikkim to be associated with the Union.—Omitted.]
3. Formation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or
names of existing States.
4. Laws made under articles 2 and 3 to provide for the amendment of
the First and the Fourth Schedules and supplemental, incidental
and consequential matters.
PART II
CITIZENSHIP
5. Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution.
6. Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to
India from Pakistan.
7. Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan.
8. Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing
outside India.
9. Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to
be citizens.
10. Continuance of the rights of citizenship.
11. Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law.
Contents
ARTICLES
(ii)
PART III
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
General
12. Definition.
13. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental
rights.
Right to Equality
14. Equality before law.
15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste,
sex or place of birth.
16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.
17. Abolition of Untouchability.
18. Abolition of titles.
Right to Freedom
19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.
20. Protection in respect of conviction for offences.
21. Protection of life and personal liberty.
21A. Right to education.
22. Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
23. Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.
24. Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.
Right to Freedom of Religion
25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and
propagation of religion.
26. Freedom to manage religious affairs.
27. Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular
religion.
28. Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious
worship in certain educational institutions.
Contents
ARTICLES
(iii)
Cultural and Educational Rights
29. Protection of interests of minorities.
30. Right of minorities to establish and administer educational
institutions.
[31. Compulsory acquisition of property —Omitted.]
Saving of Certain Laws
31A. Saving of Laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.
31B. Validation of certain Acts and Regulations.
31C. Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles.
[31D. Saving of laws in respect of anti-national activities.—Omitted.]
Right to Constitutional Remedies
 32. Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part.
[32A. Constitutional validity of State laws not to be considered in
proceedings under article 32.—Omitted.]
33. Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part
in their application to Forces, etc.
 34. Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is
in force in any area.
35. Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part.
PART IV
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY36. Definition.
37. Application of the principles contained in this Part.
38. State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the
people.
39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State.
39A. Equal justice and free legal aid.
Contents
ARTICLES
(iv)
40. Organisation of village panchayats.
 41. Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases. 42. Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity
relief.
 43. Living wage, etc., for workers.
43A. Participation of workers in management of Industries.
43B. Promotion of co-operative societies.
44. Uniform civil code for the citizens.
 45. Provision for early childhood care and education to children
below the age of six years.
46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.
47. Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard
of living and to improve public health.
48. Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry.
48A. Protection and improvement of environment and safeguarding of
forests and wild life.
49. Protection of monuments and places and objects of national
importance.
50. Separation of judiciary from executive.
51. Promotion of international peace and security.
PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A. Fundamental duties.
PART V
THE UNION
CHAPTER I. THE EXECUTIVE
The President and Vice-President
52. The President of India.
53. Executive power of the Union.
54. Election of President.
Contents
ARTICLES
(v)
55. Manner of election of President.
56. Term of office of President.
57. Eligibility for re-election.
58. Qualifications for election as President.
59. Conditions of President’s office.
60. Oath or affirmation by the President.
61. Procedure for impeachment of the President.
62. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of President
and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy.
63. The Vice-President of India.
64. The Vice-President to be ex officio Chairman of the Council of
States.
65. The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his
functions during casual vacancies in the office, or during the
absence, of President.
66. Election of Vice-President.
67. Term of office of Vice-President.
68. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President
and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy.
69. Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President.
70. Discharge of President’s functions in other contingencies.
71. Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a President
or Vice-President.
72. Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit
or commute sentences in certain cases.
73. Extent of executive power of the Union.
Council of Ministers
74. Council of Ministers to aid and advise President. 75. Other provisions as to Ministers.
The Attorney-General for India
76. Attorney-General for India.
Contents
ARTICLES
(vi)
Conduct of Government Business
77. Conduct of business of the Government of India.
78. Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of
information to the President, etc.
CHAPTER II. PARLIAMENT
General
79. Constitution of Parliament.
80. Composition of the Council of States.
81. Composition of the House of the People.
82. Readjustment after each census.
83. Duration of Houses of Parliament.
84. Qualification for membership of Parliament.
85. Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.
86. Right of President to address and send messages to Houses.
87. Special address by the President.
88. Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses.
Officers of Parliament
89. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States.
90. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of
Deputy Chairman.
91. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.
92. The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
93. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.
94. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
95. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.
Contents
ARTICLES
(vii)
96. The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
97. Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman
and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
98. Secretariat of Parliament.
Conduct of Business
99. Oath or affirmation by members.
100. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding
vacancies and quorum.
Disqualifications of Members
101. Vacation of seats.
102. Disqualifications for membership.
103. Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.
104. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation
under article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified.
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its
Members
105. Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the
members and committees thereof.
106. Salaries and allowances of members.
Legislative Procedure
107. Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.
108. Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases.
109. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.
110. Definition of “Money Bills”.
111. Assent to Bills.
Procedure in Financial Matters
112. Annual financial statement.
113. Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates.
114. Appropriation Bills.
Contents
ARTICLES
(viii)
115. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
116. Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.
117. Special provisions as to financial Bills.
Procedure Generally
118. Rules of procedure.
119. Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to
financial business.
120. Language to be used in Parliament.
121. Restriction on discussion in Parliament.
122. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament.
CHAPTER III. LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE
PRESIDENT
123. Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of
Parliament.
CHAPTER IV. THE UNION JUDICIARY124. Establishment and constitution of the Supreme Court.
124A. National Judicial Appointments Commission.
124B. Functions of Commission.
124C. Power of Parliament to make law.
125. Salaries, etc., of Judges.
126. Appointment of acting Chief Justice.
127. Appointment of ad hoc Judges.
128. Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme Court.
129. Supreme Court to be a court of record.
130. Seat of Supreme Court.
131. Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
[131A. Exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to questions
as to constitutional validity of Central laws. Omitted.]
132. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from
High Courts in certain cases.
133. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from
High Courts in regard to civil matters.
134. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to criminal
matters.
Contents
ARTICLES
(ix)
134A. Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court.
 135. Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law
to be exercisable by the Supreme Court.
136. Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.
 137. Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court.
138. Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
139. Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain
writs.
139A. Transfer of certain cases.
140. Ancillary powers of the Supreme Court.
 141. Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts.
142. Enforcement of decrees and orders of the Supreme Court and
orders as to discovery, etc.
 143. Power of the President to consult the Supreme Court.
144. Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the Supreme
Court.
[144A. Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to
constitutional validity of laws. Omitted.]
145. Rules of Court, etc.
146. Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court.
147. Interpretation.
CHAPTER V. COMPTROLLER AND AUDITORGENERAL OF INDIA
148. Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
149. Duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
150. Form of accounts of the Union and of the States.
151. Audit reports.
PART VI
THE STATES
CHAPTER I. GENERAL
152. Definition.
Contents
ARTICLES
(x)
CHAPTER II. THE EXECUTIVE
The Governor
 153. Governors of States.
 154. Executive power of State.
 155. Appointment of Governor.
156. Term of office of Governor.
157. Qualifications for appointment as Governor.
 158. Conditions of Governor’s office.
 159. Oath or affirmation by the Governor.
 160. Discharge of the functions of the Governor in certain
contingencies.
161. Power of Governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit
or commute sentences in certain cases.
162. Extent of executive power of State.
Council of Ministers
163. Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor.
 164. Other provisions as to Ministers.
The Advocate-General for the State
165. Advocate-General for the State.
Conduct of Government Business
166. Conduct of business of the Government of a State.
167. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of
information to Governor, etc.
CHAPTER III. THE STATE LEGISLATURE
General
168. Constitution of Legislatures in States.
169. Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in States.
170. Composition of the Legislative Assemblies.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xi)
171. Composition of the Legislative Councils.
172. Duration of State Legislatures.
173. Qualification for membership of the State Legislature.
174. Sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation and dissolution.
175. Right of Governor to address and send messages to the House or
Houses.
176. Special address by the Governor.
177. Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the
Houses.
Officers of the State Legislature
178. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly.
179. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
180. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.
181. The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
182. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council.
183. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Chairman and Deputy Chairman.
184. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.
185. The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
186. Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and
the Chairman and Deputy Chairman.
187. Secretariat of State Legislature.
Conduct of Business
188. Oath or affirmation by members.
189. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding
vacancies and quorum.
Disqualifications of Members
190. Vacation of seats.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xii)
191. Disqualifications for membership.
192. Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.
193. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation
under article 188 or when not qualified or when disqualified.
Powers, privileges and immunities of State Legislatures and
their Members
194. Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of the
members and committees thereof.
195. Salaries and allowances of members.
Legislative Procedure
196. Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.
197. Restriction on powers of Legislative Council as to Bills other
than Money Bills.
198. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.
199. Definition of “Money Bills”.
200. Assent to Bills.
201. Bills reserved for consideration.
Procedure in Financial Matters
202. Annual financial statement.
203. Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates.
204. Appropriation Bills.
205. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
206. Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.
207. Special provisions as to financial Bills.
Procedure Generally
208. Rules of procedure.
209. Regulation by law of procedure in the Legislature of the State in
relation to financial business.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xiii)
210. Language to be used in the Legislature.
211. Restriction on discussion in the Legislature.
212. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the Legislature.
CHAPTER IV. LEGISLATIVE POWER OF THE
GOVERNOR
213. Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of
Legislature. CHAPTER V. THE HIGH COURTS IN THE
STATES
214. High Courts for States.
215. High Courts to be courts of record.
216. Constitution of High Courts.
217. Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High
Court.
218. Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme Court to
High Courts.
219. Oath or affirmation by Judges of High Courts.
220. Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge.
221. Salaries, etc., of Judges.
222. Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another.
223. Appointment of acting Chief Justice.
224. Appointment of additional and acting Judges.
224A. Appointment of retired Judges at sittings of High Courts.
225. Jurisdiction of existing High Courts.
226. Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.
[226A. Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered in
proceedings under article 226. Omitted.]
227. Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court.
228. Transfer of certain cases to High Court.
[228A. Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to
constitutional validity of State laws. Omitted.]
Contents
ARTICLES
(xiv)
229. Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts.
230. Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union territories.
231. Establishment of a common High Court for two or more States.
[232. Articles 230, 231 and 232 substituted by articles 230 and 231].
CHAPTER VI. SUBORDINATE COURTS
233. Appointment of district judges.
233A. Validation of appointments of, and judgments, etc., delivered by,
certain district judges.
234. Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial
service.
235. Control over subordinate courts.
236. Interpretation.
237. Application of the provisions of this Chapter to certain class or
classes of magistrates.
[PART VII.—Omitted]
THE STATES IN PART B OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE[238. Omitted.]
PART VIII
THE UNION TERRITORIES
239. Administration of Union territories.
239A. Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or both for
certain Union territories.
239AA. Special provisions with respect to Delhi.
239AB. Provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery.
239B. Power of administrator to promulgate Ordinances during recess
of Legislature.
240. Power of President to make regulations for certain Union
territories.
241. High Courts for Union territories.
[242. Coorg. Omitted.]
PART IX
THE PANCHAYATS
243. Definitions.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xv)
243A. Gram Sabha.
243B. Constitution of Panchayats.
243C. Composition of Panchayats.
243D. Reservation of seats.
243E. Duration of Panchayats, etc.
243F. Disqualifications for membership.
243G. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.
243H. Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats.
243-I. Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial
position.
243J. Audit of accounts of Panchayats.
243K. Elections to the Panchayats.
243L. Application to Union territories.
243M. Part not to apply to certain areas.
243N. Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats.
243-O. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.
PART IXA
THE MUNICIPALITIES
243P. Definitions.
243Q. Constitution of Municipalities.
243R. Composition of Municipalities.
243S. Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc.
243T. Reservation of seats.
243U. Duration of Municipalities, etc.
243V. Disqualifications for membership.
243W. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc.
243X. Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities.
243Y. Finance Commission.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xvi)
243Z. Audit of accounts of Municipalities.
243ZA. Elections to the Municipalities.
243ZB. Application to Union territories.
243ZC. Part not to apply to certain areas.
243ZD. Committee for district planning.
243ZE. Committee for Metropolitan planning.
243ZF. Continuance of existing laws and Municipalities.
243ZG. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.
PART IXB
THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
243ZH. Definitions.
243Z-I. Incorporation of co-operative societies.
243ZJ. Number and term of members of board and its office bearers.
243ZK. Election of members of board.
243ZL. Supersession and suspension of board and interim management.
243ZM. Audit of accounts of co-operative societies.
243ZN. Convening of general body meetings.
243Z-O. Right of a member to get information.
243ZP. Returns.
243ZQ. Offences and penalties.
243ZR. Application to multi-State co-operative societies.
243ZS. Application to Union territories.
243ZT. Continuance of existing laws.
PART X
THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS
244. Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas.
244A. Formation of an autonomous State comprising certain tribal
areas in Assam and creation of local Legislature or Council of
Ministers or both therefor.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xvii)
PART XI
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE
STATES
CHAPTER I. LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS
Distribution of Legislative Powers
245. Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of
States.
246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the
Legislatures of States.
246A. Special provision with respect to goods and services tax.
247. Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain
additional courts.
248. Residuary powers of legislation.
249. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the
State List in the national interest.
250. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in the
State List if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.
251. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles
249 and 250 and laws made by the Legislatures of States.
252. Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by
consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State.
253. Legislation for giving effect to international agreements.
254. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made
by the Legislatures of States.
255. Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to
be regarded as matters of procedure only.
CHAPTER II. ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
General
256. Obligation of States and the Union.
257. Control of the Union over States in certain cases.
[257A. Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other
forces of the Union. Omitted.]
258. Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain cases. 
Contents
ARTICLES
(xviii)
258A. Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union.
 [259. Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First Schedule.
Omitted.]
260. Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India.
261. Public acts, records and judicial proceedings.
Disputes relating to Waters
262. Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers
or river valleys.
Co-ordination between States
263. Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council.
PART XII
FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS
CHAPTER I. FINANCE
General
264. Interpretation.
265. Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.
266. Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the
States.
267. Contingency Fund.
Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States
268. Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by the
States.
[268A. Service tax levied by Union and collected by the Union and the
States. Omitted.]
269. Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the
States.
269A. Levy and collection of goods and services tax in course of interState trade or commerce.
270. Taxes levied and distributed between the Union and the States.
271. Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the Union.
[272. Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union and may be
distributed between the Union and the States. Omitted.]
273. Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products.
274. Prior recommendation of President required to Bills affecting
taxation in which States are interested.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xix)
275. Grants from the Union to certain States.
276. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.
277. Savings.
[278. Agreement with States in Part B of the First Schedule with
regard to certain financial matters. Omitted.]
279. Calculation of “net proceeds”, etc. 279A. Goods and Services Tax Council.
280. Finance Commission.
281. Recommendations of the Finance Commission.
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions
282. Expenditure defrayable by the Union or a State out of its revenues. 283. Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and
moneys credited to the public accounts.
284. Custody of suitors’ deposits and other moneys received by
public servants and courts.
285. Exemption of property of the Union from State taxation.
286. Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of
goods.
287. Exemption from taxes on electricity.
288. Exemption from taxation by States in respect of water or
electricity in certain cases.
289. Exemption of property and income of a State from Union
taxation.
290. Adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions.
290A. Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds.
[291. Privy purse sums of Rulers. Omitted.]
CHAPTER II. BORROWING292. Borrowing by the Government of India.
293. Borrowing by States.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xx)
CHAPTER III. PROPERTY, CONTRACTS, RIGHTS, LIABILITIES, OBLIGATIONS AND SUITS
294. Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations
in certain cases.
295. Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations
in other cases.
296. Property accruing by escheat or lapse or as bona vacantia.
 297. Things of value within territorial waters or continental shelf and
resources of the exclusive economic zone to vest in the Union.
 298. Power to carry on trade, etc.
299. Contracts.
300. Suits and proceedings.
CHAPTER IV. RIGHT TO PROPERTY300A. Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law.
PART XIII
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE
WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF INDIA301. Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.
302. Power of Parliament to impose restrictions on trade, commerce
and intercourse.
303. Restrictions on the legislative powers of the Union and of the
States with regard to trade and commerce.
304. Restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse among States.
305. Saving of existing laws and laws providing for State monopolies.
[306. Power of certain States in Part B of the First Schedule to
impose restrictions on trade and commerce. Omitted]
307. Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of
articles 301 to 304.
PART XIV
SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I. SERVICES
308. Interpretation.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xxi)
309. Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the
Union or a State.
310. Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a State.
311. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in
civil capacities under the Union or a State.
312. All-India services.
312A. Power of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service of
officers of certain services.
313. Transitional provisions.
[314. Provision for protection of existing officers of certain services.
Omitted.]
 CHAPTER II.—PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS
 315. Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States.
316. Appointment and term of office of members.
317. Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service
Commission.
318. Power to make regulations as to conditions of service of
members and staff of the Commission.
319. Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of
Commission on ceasing to be such members.
320. Functions of Public Service Commissions.
321. Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions.
322. Expenses of Public Service Commissions.
323. Reports of Public Service Commissions.
PART XIVA
TRIBUNALS
323A. Administrative tribunals.
323B. Tribunals for other matters.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xxii)
PART XV
ELECTIONS
 324. Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested
in an Election Commission.
 325. No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be
included in a special, electoral roll on grounds of religion, race,
caste or sex.
 326. Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative
Assemblies of States to be on the basis of adult suffrage.
327. Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to elections
to Legislatures.
328. Power of Legislature of a State to make provision with respect to
elections to such Legislature.
329. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.
 [329A. Special provision as to elections to Parliament in the case of
Prime Minister and Speaker. Omitted.]
PART XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN
CLASSES
330.
330A.
Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in the House of the People.
Reservation of seats for women in the House of the People.
331. Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of
the People.
332.
332A.
Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
Reservation of seats for women in the Legislative Assemblies of
the States.
333. Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the
Legislative Assemblies of the States.
334.
334A.
Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after
certain period.
Reservation of seats for women take effect.
335. Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services
and posts.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xxiii)
336. Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain
services.
337. Special provision with respect to educational grants for the
benefit of Anglo-Indian Community.
 338. National Commission for Scheduled Castes.
338A. National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.
338B. National Commission for Backward Classes.
 339. Control of the Union over the administration of Scheduled Areas
and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes.
340. Appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of
backward classes.
 341. Scheduled Castes.
 342. Scheduled Tribes.
342A. Socially and educationally backward classes.
PART XVII
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
CHAPTER I.—LANGUAGE OF THE UNION343. Official language of the Union.
 344. Commission and Committee of Parliament on official language.
CHAPTER II. REGIONAL LANGUAGES
345. Official language or languages of a State.
346. Official language for communication between one State and
another or between a State and the Union.
347. Special provision relating to language spoken by a section of the
population of a State.
CHAPTER III. LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT, HIGH COURTS, ETC. 348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High
Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.
349. Special procedure for enactment of certain laws relating to
language.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xxiv)
CHAPTER IV. SPECIAL DIRECTIVES
350. Language to be used in representations for redress of grievances.
350A. Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary stage.
350B. Special Officer for linguistic minorities.
351. Directive for development of the Hindi language.
PART XVIII
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
 352. Proclamation of Emergency.
 353. Effect of Proclamation of Emergency.
 354. Application of provisions relating to distribution of revenues
while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.
 355. Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression
and internal disturbance.
356. Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in
States.
357. Exercise of legislative powers under Proclamation issued under
article 356.
358. Suspension of provisions of article 19 during emergencies.
359. Suspension of the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III
during emergencies.
[359A. Application of this Part to the State of Punjab. Omitted.]
360. Provisions as to financial emergency.
PART XIX
MISCELLANEOUS
361. Protection of President and Governors and Rajpramukhs.
361A. Protection of publication of proceedings of Parliament and State
Legislatures.
361B. Disqualification for appointment on remunerative political post.
[362. Rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States. Omitted.]
363. Bar to interference by courts in disputes arising out of certain
treaties, agreements, etc.
363A. Recognition granted to Rulers of Indian States to cease and privy
purses to be abolished.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xxv)
364. Special provisions as to major ports and aerodromes.
365. Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions
given by the Union.
366. Definitions.
367. Interpretation.
PART XX
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION368. Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure
therefor.
PART XXI
TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL AND
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
369. Temporary power to Parliament to make laws with respect to
certain matters in the State List as if they were matters in the
Concurrent List.
370. Temporary provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.
371. Special provision with respect to the States of Maharashtra and
Gujarat.
371A. Special provision with respect to the State of Nagaland.
371B . Special provision with respect to the State of Assam.
371C. Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur.
371D. Special provisions with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh or
the State of Telangana.
371E. Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh.
371F. Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim.
371G. Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram.
371H. Special provision with respect to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
371-I. Special provision with respect to the State of Goa.
371J. Special provisions with respect to the State of Karnataka.
372. Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation.
372A. Power of the President to adapt laws.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xxvi)
373. Power of President to make order in respect of persons under
preventive detention in certain cases.
374. Provisions as to Judges of the Federal Court and proceedings
pending in the Federal Court or before His Majesty in Council.
375. Courts, authorities and officers to continue to function subject to
the provisions of the Constitution.
376. Provisions as to Judges of High Courts.
377. Provisions as to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
378. Provisions as to Public Service Commissions.
378A. Special provision as to duration of Andhra Pradesh Legislative
Assembly.
[379. Provisions as to provisional Parliament and the Speaker and
Deputy Speaker thereof. Omitted.]
[380. Provision as to President. Omitted.]
[381. Council of Ministers of the President. Omitted.]
[382. Provisions as to provisional Legislatures for States in Part A of
the First Schedule. Omitted.]
[383. Provision as to Governors of Provinces. Omitted.]
[384. Council of Ministers of the Governors. Omitted.]
[385. Provision as to provisional Legislatures in States in Part B of the
First Schedule. Omitted.]
[386. Council of Ministers for States in Part B of the First Schedule.
Omitted.]
[387. Special provision as to determination of population for the
purposes of certain elections. Omitted.]
[388. Provisions as to the filling of casual vacancies in the provisional
Parliament and provisional Legislatures of the
States. Omitted.]
[389. Provision as to Bills pending in the Dominion Legislatures and
in the Legislatures of Provinces and Indian States. Omitted.] 
Contents
ARTICLES
(xxvii)
[390. Money received or raised or expenditure incurred between the
commencement of the Constitution and the 31st day of March,
1950. Omitted.]
[391. Power of the President to amend the First and Fourth Schedules
in certain contingencies. Omitted.]
392. Power of the President to remove difficulties.
PART XXII
SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT,
AUTHORITATIVE TEXT
IN HINDI AND REPEALS
 393. Short title.
394. Commencement.
394A. Authoritative text in the Hindi language.
395. Repeals.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE
I. —The States.
II. —The Union territories.
SECOND SCHEDULE
PART A—Provisions as to the President and the Governors of States.
PART B— [Omitted.]
PART C—Provisions as to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
House of the People and the Chairman and the Deputy
Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and
the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the
Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative
Council of a State.
PART D— Provisions as to the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts.
PART E— Provisions as to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
THIRD SCHEDULE— Forms of Oaths or Affirmations.
Contents
ARTICLES
(xxviii)
FOURTH SCHEDULE—Allocation of seats in the Council of States.
FIFTH SCHEDULE—
Provisions as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas
and Scheduled Tribes
PART A—General.
PART B—Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and
Scheduled Tribes.
PART C— Scheduled Areas.
PART D—Amendment of the Schedule.
SIXTH SCHEDULE—
Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in the States of
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
SEVENTH SCHEDULE—
 List I — Union List.
 List II— State List.
List III— Concurrent List.
EIGHTH SCHEDULE— Languages.
NINTH SCHEDULE—Validation of certain Acts and Regulations.
TENTH SCHEDULE— Provisions as to disqualification on ground of
defection.
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE—Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.
TWELFTH SCHEDULE—Powers, authority and responsibilities of
Municipalities, etc.
APPENDICES
APPENDIX I.—The Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.
APPENDIX II.—The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir)
Order, 2019.
APPENDIX III.— Declaration under article 370(3) of the Constitution.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute
India into a 1
[SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC] and to secure to all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the 2
[unity
and integrity of the Nation];
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of
November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO
OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s.2, for "SOVEREIGN
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "Unity of the Nation" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2
PART I
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY1. Name and territory of the Union.—(1) India, that is Bharat,
shall be a Union of States. 1
[(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as specified in
the First Schedule.]
(3) The territory of India shall comprise—(a) the territories of the States; 2
[(b) the Union territories specified in the First Schedule;
and]
(c) such other territories as may be acquired.
2. Admission or establishment of new States.—Parliament may
by law admit into the Union, or establish, new States on such terms and
conditions as it thinks fit.
3
[2A. [Sikkim to be associated with the Union.] —Omitted by the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).]
3. Formation of new States and alteration of areas,
boundaries or names of existing States.—Parliament may by law—(a) form a new State by separation of territory from any
State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States or by
uniting any territory to a part of any State;
(b) increase the area of any State;
(c) diminish the area of any State;
(d) alter the boundaries of any State;
(e) alter the name of any State: ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2, for cl. (2)
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 2 ibid. for sub-clause (b) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part I.—Union and its territory)
3
1
[Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in
either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the
President and unless, where the proposal contained in the Bill affects
the area, boundaries or name of any of the States12
***, the Bill has
been referred by the President to the Legislature of that State for
expressing its views thereon within such period as may be specified in
the reference or within such further period as the President may allow
and the period so specified or allowed has expired.]
3
[Explanation I.—In this article, in clauses (a) to (e), “State”
includes a Union territory, but in the proviso, “State” does not include a
Union territory.
Explanation II.—The power conferred on Parliament by
clause (a) includes the power to form a new State or Union territory by
uniting a part of any State or Union territory to any other State or
Union territory.]
4. Laws made under articles 2 and 3 to provide for the
amendment of the First and the Fourth Schedules and
supplemental, incidental and consequential matters.—(1) Any law
referred to in article 2 or article 3 shall contain such provisions for the
amendment of the First Schedule and the Fourth Schedule as may be
necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also
contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions
(including provisions as to representation in Parliament and in the
Legislature or Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law)
as Parliament may deem necessary.
(2) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be an
amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 2, for the proviso
(w.e.f. 24-12-1955).
2. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27-8-1966).
4
PART II
CITIZENSHIP
5. Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution.—At the
commencement of this Constitution, every person who has his domicile in the
territory of India and—
(a) who was born in the territory of India; or
(b) either of whose parents was born in the territory of India; or
(c) who has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for
not less than five years immediately preceding such commencement,
shall be a citizen of India.
6. Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to
India from Pakistan.—Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person who
has migrated to the territory of India from the territory now included in
Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the commencement of this
Constitution if—
(a) he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was born
in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally
enacted); and
(b)(i) in the case where such person has so migrated before the
nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been ordinarily resident in the
territory of India since the date of his migration, or
(ii) in the case where such person has so migrated on or after the
nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been registered as a citizen of India
by an officer appointed in that behalf by the Government of the
Dominion of India on an application made by him therefor to such
officer before the commencement of this Constitution in the form and
manner prescribed by that Government:
Provided that no person shall be so registered unless he has been resident
in the territory of India for at least six months immediately preceding the date
of his application.
7. Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan.—Notwithstanding anything in articles 5 and 6, a person who has after the first
day of March, 1947, migrated from the territory of India to the territory now
included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be a citizen of India:
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part II.—Citizenship)
5
Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a person who, after
having so migrated to the territory now included in Pakistan, has returned to the
territory of India under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued by
or under the authority of any law and every such person shall for the purposes
of clause (b) of article 6 be deemed to have migrated to the territory of India
after the nineteenth day of July, 1948.
8. Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing
outside India.—Notwithstanding anything in article 5, any person who or
either of whose parents or any of whose grand-parents was born in India as
defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted), and who
is ordinarily residing in any country outside India as so defined shall be deemed
to be a citizen of India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the
diplomatic or consular representative of India in the country where he is for the
time being residing on an application made by him therefor to such diplomatic
or consular representative, whether before or after the commencement of this
Constitution, in the form and manner prescribed by the Government of the
Dominion of India or the Government of India.
9. Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to
be citizens.—No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of article 5, or be
deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue of article 6 or article 8, if he has
voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign State.
10. Continuance of the rights of citizenship.—Every person who is or
is deemed to be a citizen of India under any of the foregoing provisions of this
Part shall, subject to the provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament,
continue to be such citizen.
11. Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law.—Nothing
in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall derogate from the power of
Parliament to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and
termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to citizenship.
6
PART III
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
General
12. Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “the
State” includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government
and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within
the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.
13. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental
rights.—(1) All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the
rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause
shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.
(3) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires,—(a) “law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation,
notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of
law;
(b) “laws in force” includes laws passed or made by a Legislature
or other competent authority in the territory of India before the
commencement of this Constitution and not previously repealed,
notwithstanding that any such law or any part thereof may not be then in
operation either at all or in particular areas. 1
[(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any amendment of this
Constitution made under article 368.]
Right to Equality
14. Equality before law.—The State shall not deny to any person
equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of
India.
15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste,
sex or place of birth.—(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of
birth or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or
condition with regard to—
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5-11-1971). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
7
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public
entertainment; or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of
public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated
to the use of the general public.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any
special provision for women and children. 1
[(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the
State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially
and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes.] 2
[(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19
shall prevent the State from making any special provision, by law, for the
advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or
for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special
provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions including private
educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the
minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.] 3
[(6) Nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 or
clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from making,—(a) any special provision for the advancement of any
economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes
mentioned in clauses (4) and (5); and
(b) any special provision for the advancement of any
economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes
mentioned in clauses (4) and (5) in so far as such special provisions
relate to their admission to educational institutions including private
educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other
than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of
article 30, which in the case of reservation would be in addition to the
existing reservations and subject to a maximum of ten per cent. of the
total seats in each category. ______________________________________________
1. Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-1-2006).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019, s. 2
(w.e.f. 14-1-2019).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
8
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article and article 16,
"economically weaker sections" shall be such as may be notified by the State
from time to time on the basis of family income and other indicators of
economic disadvantage.]
16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.—(1)
There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent,
place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against
in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law
prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an
office 1
[under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State
or Union territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union
territory] prior to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any
backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately
represented in the services under the State. 2
[(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any
provision for reservation 3
[in matters of promotion, with consequential
seniority, to any class] or classes of posts in the services under the State in
favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion
of the State, are not adequately represented in the services under the State.] 4
[(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from considering
any unfilled vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that
year in accordance with any provision for reservation made under clause (4) or
clause (4A) as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding
year or years and such class of vacancies shall not be considered together with
the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up for determining the
ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for "under
any State specified in the First Schedule or any local or other authority within its
territory, any requirement as to residence within that State" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995, s. 2 (w.e.f. 17-6-1995).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for certain words
(retrospectively) (w.e.f. 17-6-1995).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-6-2000).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
9
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which
provides that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any
religious or denominational institution or any member of the governing body
thereof shall be a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a
particular denomination. 1
[(6) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any
economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in
clause (4), in addition to the existing reservation and subject to a maximum of
ten per cent. of the posts in each category.]
17. Abolition of Untouchability.—“Untouchability” is abolished and its
practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability arising out
of “Untouchability” shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.
18. Abolition of titles.—(1) No title, not being a military or academic
distinction, shall be conferred by the State.
(2) No citizen of India shall accept any title from any foreign State.
(3) No person who is not a citizen of India shall, while he holds any
office of profit or trust under the State, accept without the consent of the
President any title from any foreign State.
(4) No person holding any office of profit or trust under the State shall,
without the consent of the President, accept any present, emolument, or office
of any kind from or under any foreign State.
Right to Freedom
19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.—(1) All citizens shall have the right—(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
(b) to assemble peaceably and without arms;
(c) to form associations or unions 2
[or co-operative societies];
(d) to move freely throughout the territory of India; ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019, s. 3
(w.e.f. 14-1-2019).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-2-2012).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
10
(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India; 1
[and] 2
[(f)* * * * *]
(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or
business. 3
[(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of
any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as such
law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the
said sub-clause in the interests of 4
[the sovereignty and integrity of India], the
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,
decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or
incitement to an offence.]
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (b) of the said clause shall affect the operation
of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making
any law imposing, in the interests of 4
[the sovereignty and integrity of India or]
public order, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by
the said sub-clause.
(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation
of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making
any law imposing, in the interests of 4
[the sovereignty and integrity of India or]
public order or morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right
conferred by the said sub-clause.
(5) Nothing in 5
[sub-clauses (d) and (e)] of the said clause shall affect
the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State
from making any law imposing, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of any
of the rights conferred by the said sub-clauses either in the interests of the
general public or for the protection of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Sub-clause (f) omitted by s.2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 3, for cl. (2) (with retrospective
effect).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 2, for "sub-clauses
(d), (e) and (f)" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
11
(6) Nothing in sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall affect the operation
of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making
any law imposing, in the interests of the general public, reasonable restrictions
on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause, and, in particular, 1
[nothing in the said sub-clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in
so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from making any law relating to,—(i) the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising
any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business; or
(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or
controlled by the State, of any trade, business, industry or service,
whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise.]
20. Protection in respect of conviction for offences.—(1) No person
shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force at the
time of the commission of the Act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a
penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force
at the time of the commission of the offence.
(2) No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence
more than once.
(3) No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness
against himself.
21. Protection of life and personal liberty.—No person shall be
deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure
established by law. 2
[21A. Right to education.—The State shall provide free and
compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such
manner as the State may, by law, determine.]
22. Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.—(1) No
person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as
soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right
to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 3, for certain words
(w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
2 Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-4-2010).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
12
(2) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be
produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of
such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest
to the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody
beyond the said period without the authority of a magistrate.
(3) Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall apply—(a) to any person who for the time being is an enemy alien; or
(b) to any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing
for preventive detention.
(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the
detention of a person for a longer period than three months unless—(a) an Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or have been,
or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges of a High Court has reported
before the expiration of the said period of three months that there is in its
opinion sufficient cause for such detention: ______________________________________________ Cl. (4) shall stand substituted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 3 (date
yet to be notified) as—
"(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for
a longer period than two months unless an Advisory Board constituted in accordance with the
recommendations of the Chief Justice of the appropriate High Court has reported before the
expiration of the said period of two months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such
detention:
Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other
members, and the Chairman shall be a serving Judge of the appropriate High Court and the other
members shall be serving or retired Judges of any High Court :
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall authorise the detention of any person
beyond the maximum period prescribed by any law made by Parliament under sub-clause (a) of
clause (7).
Explanation.—In this clause, "appropriate High Court" means,—(i) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention
made by the Government of India or an officer or authority subordinate to that
Government, the High Court for the Union territory of Dehli;
(ii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention
made by the Government of any State (other than a Union territory), the High Court for
that State; and
(iii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention
made by the administrator of a Union territory or an officer or authority subordinate to such
administrator, such High Court as may be specified by or under any law made by
Parliament in this behalf.".
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
13
Provided that nothing in this sub-clause shall authorise the detention
of any person beyond the maximum period prescribed by any law made
by Parliament under sub-clause (b) of clause (7); or
(b) such person is detained in accordance with the provisions of any
law made by Parliament under sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (7).
(5) When any person is detained in pursuance of an order made under
any law providing for preventive detention, the authority making the order
shall, as soon as may be, communicate to such person the grounds on which the
order has been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a
representation against the order.
(6) Nothing in clause (5) shall require the authority making any such
order as is referred to in that clause to disclose facts which such authority
considers to be against the public interest to disclose.
(7) Parliament may by law prescribe—(a) the circumstances under which, and the class or classes of cases
in which, a person may be detained for a period longer than three months
under any law providing for preventive detention without obtaining the
opinion of an Advisory Board in accordance with the provisions of
sub-clause (a) of clause (4);
(b) the maximum period for which any person may in any class or
classes of cases be detained under any law providing for preventive
detention; and
(c) the procedure to be followed by an Advisory Board in an
inquiry under sub-clause (a) of clause (4). ______________________________________________ Sub-clause (a) shall stand omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 3(b)(i) (date to be notified).
 Sub-clause (b) shall stand re-lettered as sub-clause (a) by s. 3(b)(ii), ibid. (date to be
notified).
Sub-clause (c) shall stand re-lettered as sub-clause (b) by s. 3(b)(iii), ibid. (date to be
notified).
Sub-clause (a) of clause (4) shall stand substituted as "clause (4)" by s. 3(b)(iii),
ibid. (date to be notified).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
14
Right against Exploitation
23. Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.—(1)
Traffic in human beings and begar and other similar forms of forced labour are
prohibited and any contravention of this provision shall be an offence
punishable in accordance with law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from imposing
compulsory service for public purposes, and in imposing such service the State
shall not make any discrimination on grounds only of religion, race, caste or
class or any of them.
24. Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.—No child
below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory or
mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.
Right to Freedom of Religion
25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and
propagation of religion.—(1) Subject to public order, morality and health and
to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom
of conscience and the right freely to profess, practice and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or
prevent the State from making any law—(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or
other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open
of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and
sections of Hindus.
Explanation I.—The wearing and carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to
be included in the profession of the Sikh religion.
Explanation II.—In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the reference to Hindus
shall be construed as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina
or Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religious institutions shall be
construed accordingly.
26. Freedom to manage religious affairs.—Subject to public order,
morality and health, every religious denomination or any section thereof shall
have the right—
(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable
purposes;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
15
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property; and
(d) to administer such property in accordance with law.
27. Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular
religion.—No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of
which are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the promotion
or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination.
28. Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious
worship in certain educational institutions.—(1) No religious instruction
shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out of State
funds.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to an educational institution which
is administered by the State but has been established under any endowment or
trust which requires that religious instruction shall be imparted in such
institution.
(3) No person attending any educational institution recognised by the
State or receiving aid out of State funds shall be required to take part in any
religious instruction that may be imparted in such institution or to attend any
religious worship that may be conducted in such institution or in any premises
attached thereto unless such person or, if such person is a minor, his guardian
has given his consent thereto.
Cultural and Educational Rights
29. Protection of interests of minorities.—(1) Any section of the
citizens residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct
language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same.
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language or any of them.
30. Right of minorities to establish and administer educational
institutions.—(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall
have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
16
1
[(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of
any property of an educational institution established and administered by a
minority, referred to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed
by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as
would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.]
(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions,
discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is under
the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language. 2
* * * *
31. [Compulsory acquisition of property.].—Omitted by the Constitution
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 6 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 3
[Saving of Certain Laws] 4
[31A. Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.—5
[(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law providing
for—
(a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein
or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights; or
(b) the taking over of the management of any property by the State
for a limited period either in the public interest or in order to secure the
proper management of the property; or
(c) the amalgamation of two or more corporations either in the public
interest or in order to secure the proper management of any of the
corporations; or
(d) the extinguishment or modification of any rights of managing
agents, secretaries and treasurers, managing directors, directors or
managers of corporations, or of any voting rights of shareholders
thereof; or ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 4 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Sub-heading "Right to Property" omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 4, (with retrospective effect).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 3, for cl. (1) (with
retrospective effect).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
17
(e) the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by
virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for,
or winning, any mineral or mineral oil, or the premature termination or
cancellation of any such agreement, lease or licence,
shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes
away or abridges any of the rights conferred by 1
[article 14 or article 19]:
Provided that where such law is a law made by the Legislature of a State,
the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having
been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent:] 2
[Provided further that where any law makes any provision for the
acquisition by the State of any estate and where any land comprised therein is
held by a person under his personal cultivation, it shall not be lawful for the
State to acquire any portion of such land as is within the ceiling limit applicable
to him under any law for the time being in force or any building or structure
standing thereon or appurtenant thereto, unless the law relating to the
acquisition of such land, building or structure, provides for payment of
compensation at a rate which shall not be less than the market value thereof.]
(2) In this article,—
3
[(a) the expression “estate” shall, in relation to any local area, have
the same meaning as that expression or its local equivalent has in the
existing law relating to land tenures in force in that area and shall also
include—
(i) any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant and in the States
of 4
[Tamil Nadu] and Kerala, any janmam right;
(ii) any land held under ryotwari settlement;
(iii) any land held or let for purposes of agriculture or for
purposes ancillary thereto, including waste land, forest land, land for
pasture or sites of buildings and other structures occupied by
cultivators of land, agricultural labourers and village artisans;] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 7, for "article 14,
article 19 or article 31" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964, s. 2(i) (w.e.f. 20-6-1964).
3. Subs. by s.2(ii), ibid., for sub-clause (a) (with retrospective effect).
4. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 4, for
"Madras" (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
18
(b) the expression “rights”, in relation to an estate, shall include any
rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-proprietor, under-proprietor, tenureholder, 1
[raiyat, under-raiyat] or other intermediary and any rights or
privileges in respect of land revenue.] 2
[31B. Validation of certain Acts and Regulations.—Without
prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in article 31A, none of
the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of the
provisions thereof shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have become void, on
the ground that such Act, Regulation or provision is inconsistent with, or takes
away or abridges any of the rights conferred by, any provisions of this Part, and
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or Tribunal to the
contrary, each of the said Acts and Regulations shall, subject to the power of
any competent Legislature to repeal or amend it, continue in force.] 3
[31C. Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles.—Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law giving effect to the
policy of the State towards securing 4
[all or any of the principles laid down in
Part IV] shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or
takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by 5
[article 14 or article 19;] 6
[and no law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy
shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it does not give effect
to such policy]:
Provided that where such law is made by the Legislature of a State, the
provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been
reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent.] 7
31D. [Saving of laws in respect of anti-national activities.].—Omitted
by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act,1977, s. 2 (w.e.f.13-4-1978). ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 3 (with retrospective effect).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 5 (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20-4-1972).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 4, for “the principles
specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of article 39” (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). Section 4 has been
declared invalid by the Supreme Court in Minerva Mills Ltd. and Others Vs Union of India
and Others, AIR 1980 SC 1789.
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 8, for “article 14, article
19 or article 31” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
6. The words in italics struck down by the Supreme Court in Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of
Kerala, AIR 1973, SC 1461.
7. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 5 (w.e.f. 03-01-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
19
Right to Constitutional Remedies
32. Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part.—(1)
The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the
enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or
writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition,
quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part.
(3) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court by
clauses (1) and (2), Parliament may by law empower any other court to exercise
within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable by
the Supreme Court under clause (2).
(4) The right guaranteed by this article shall not be suspended except as
otherwise provided for by this Constitution. 1
32A. [Constitutional validity of State laws not to be considered in
proceedings under article 32.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 3 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 2
[33. Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part
in their application to Forces, etc.—Parliament may, by law, determine to what
extent any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their application to,—(a) the members of the Armed Forces; or
(b) the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of
public order; or
(c) persons employed in any bureau or other organisation established
by the State for purposes of intelligence or counter intelligence; or
(d) person employed in, or in connection with, the telecommunication
systems set up for the purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation
referred to in clauses (a) to (c),
be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties
and the maintenance of discipline among them.] ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fiftieth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for art. 33
(w.e.f. 11-9-1984).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
20
34. Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is
in force in any area.—Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions
of this Part, Parliament may by law indemnify any person in the service of the
Union or of a State or any other person in respect of any act done by him in
connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area within the
territory of India where martial law was in force or validate any sentence
passed, punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered or other act done under martial
law in such area.
35. Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) Parliament shall have, and the Legislature of a State shall not
have, power to make laws—
(i) with respect to any of the matters which under clause (3) of
article 16, clause (3) of article 32, article 33 and article 34 may be
provided for by law made by Parliament; and
(ii) for prescribing punishment for those acts which are declared
to be offences under this Part,
and Parliament shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this
Constitution, make laws for prescribing punishment for the acts referred
to in sub-clause (ii);
(b) any law in force immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution in the territory of India with respect to any of the matters
referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) or providing for punishment for
any act referred to in sub-clause (ii) of that clause shall, subject to the
terms thereof and to any adaptations and modifications that may be made
therein under article 372, continue in force until altered or repealed or
amended by Parliament.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression "law in force'' has the same
meaning as in article 372. 
21
PART IV
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
36. Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “the
State” has the same meaning as in Part III.
37. Application of the principles contained in this Part.—The
provisions contained in this Part shall not be enforceable by any court, but the
principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of
the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in
making laws.
38. State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the
people.—1
[(1)] The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by
securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice,
social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life. 2
[(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the inequalities in
income, and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and
opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people
residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations.]
39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State.—The
State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing—(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an
adequate means of livelihood;
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the
community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the
concentration of wealth and means of production to the common
detriment;
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and
the tender age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced
by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or
strength; ______________________________________________
1. Art. 38 renumbered as cl. (1) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 9 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IV.— Directive Principles of State Policy)
22
1
[(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop
in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that
childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral
and material abandonment.] 2
[39A. Equal justice and free legal aid.—The State shall secure that the
operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity,
and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes
or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not
denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.]
40. Organisation of village panchayats.—The State shall take steps to
organise village panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as
may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.
41. Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases.—The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and
development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to
education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness
and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.
42. Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity
relief.—The State shall make provision for securing just and humane
conditions of work and for maternity relief.
43. Living wage, etc., for workers.—The State shall endeavour to
secure, by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way, to
all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage,
conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of
leisure and social and cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State shall
endeavour to promote cottage industries on an individual or co-operative basis
in rural areas. 3
[43A. Participation of workers in management of industries.—The
State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, to secure the
participation of workers in the management of undertakings, establishments or
other organisations engaged in any industry.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 7, for cl. (f)
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IV.— Directive Principles of State Policy)
23
1
[43B. Promotion of co-operative societies.—The State shall endeavour
to promote voluntary formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control
and professional management of co-operative societies.]
44. Uniform civil code for the citizens.—The State shall endeavour to
secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India. 2
[45. Provision for early childhood care and education to children
below the age of six years.—The State shall endeavour to provide early
childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six
years.]
46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.—The State shall
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of
exploitation.
47. Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard
of living and to improve public health.—The State shall regard the raising of
the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the
improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the
State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for
medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to
health.
48. Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry.—The State
shall endeavour to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and
scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving
the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch
and draught cattle. 3
[48A. Protection and improvement of environment and
safeguarding of forests and wild life.—The State shall endeavour to protect
and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the
country.] ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15-2-2012).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 3, for art. 45
(w.e.f. 1-4-2010).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 10 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IV.— Directive Principles of State Policy)
24
49. Protection of monuments and places and objects of national
importance.—It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument
or place or object of artistic or historic interest, 1
[declared by or under law
made by Parliament] to be of national importance, from spoliation,
disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.
50. Separation of judiciary from executive.—The State shall take steps
to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State.
51. Promotion of international peace and security.—The State shall
endeavour to—
(a) promote international peace and security;
(b) maintain just and honourable relations between nations;
(c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the
dealings of organised peoples with one another; and
(d) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for "declared by
Parliament by law" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
25
1
[PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A. Fundamental duties.—It shall be the duty of every citizen of
India—
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and
institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our
national struggle for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of
India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called
upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood
amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and
regional or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the
dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite
culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including
forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living
creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of
inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and
collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of
endeavour and achievement; ] 2
[(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for
education to his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of
six and fourteen years.] ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 11 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-2010).
26
PART V
THE UNION
CHAPTER I.—THE EXECUTIVE
The President and Vice-President
52. The President of India.—There shall be a President of India.
53. Executive power of the Union.—(1) The executive power of the Union
shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or
through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the
supreme command of the Defence Forces of the Union shall be vested in the
President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law.
(3) Nothing in this article shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the President any functions conferred
by any existing law on the Government of any State or other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on
authorities other than the President.
54. Election of President.—The President shall be elected by the
members of an electoral college consisting of—(a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and
(b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States. 1
[Explanation.—In this article and in article 55, “State” includes the
National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Union territory of *Puducherry.]
55. Manner of election of President.—(1) As far as practicable, there
shall be uniformity in the scale of representation of the different States at the
election of the President.
(2) For the purpose of securing such uniformity among the States inter se
as well as parity between the States as a whole and the Union, the number of
votes which each elected member of Parliament and of the Legislative
Assembly of each State is entitled to cast at such election shall be determined in
the following manner:—
(a) every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State shall
have as many votes as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient
obtained by dividing the population of the State by the total number of
the elected members of the Assembly; ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1995).
* Now Puducherry vide the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006),
s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
27
(b) if, after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the remainder is
not less than five hundred, then the vote of each member referred to in
sub-clause (a) shall be further increased by one;
(c) each elected member of either House of Parliament shall have
such number of votes as may be obtained by dividing the total number of
votes assigned to the members of the Legislative Assemblies of the
States under sub-clauses (a) and (b) by the total number of the elected
members of both Houses of Parliament, fractions exceeding one-half
being counted as one and other fractions being disregarded.
(3) The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the
system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote
and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot. 1
[Explanation.—In this article, the expression “population” means the
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant
figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding
census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the
relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2
[2026] have been
published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.]
56. Term of office of President.—(1) The President shall hold office for
a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that—
(a) the President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
Vice-President, resign his office;
(b) the President may, for violation of the Constitution, be removed
from office by impeachment in the manner provided in article 61;
(c) the President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term,
continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
(2) Any resignation addressed to the Vice-President under clause (a) of
the proviso to clause (1) shall forthwith be communicated by him to the
Speaker of the House of the People. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 12, for the
Explanation (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for "2000"
(w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
28
57. Eligibility for re-election.—A person who holds, or who has held,
office as President shall, subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, be
eligible for re-election to that office.
58. Qualifications for election as President.—(1) No person shall be
eligible for election as President unless he—(a) is a citizen of India,
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People.
(2) A person shall not be eligible for election as President if he holds
any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any
State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the
said Governments.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be
deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President or
Vice-President of the Union or the Governor 1
*** of any State or is a Minister
either for the Union or for any State.
59. Conditions of President's office.—(1) The President shall not be a
member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any
State, and if a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the
Legislature of any State be elected President, he shall be deemed to have
vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as
President.
(2) The President shall not hold any other office of profit.
(3) The President shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of
his official residences and shall be also entitled to such emoluments,
allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law and,
until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and
privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.
(4) The emoluments and allowances of the President shall not be
diminished during his term of office.
60. Oath or affirmation by the President.—Every President and every
person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President shall,
before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief
Justice of India or, in his absence, the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court
available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say—______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
29
"I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will faithfully execute the office
 solemnly affirm
of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best
of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that
I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of India.".
61. Procedure for impeachment of the President.—(1) When a
President is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charge shall
be preferred by either House of Parliament.
(2) No such charge shall be preferred unless—(a) the proposal to prefer such charge is contained in a resolution
which has been moved after at least fourteen days' notice in writing
signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the
House has been given of their intention to move the resolution, and
(b) such resolution has been passed by a majority of not less than
two-thirds of the total membership of the House.
(3) When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament,
the other House shall investigate the charge or cause the charge to be
investigated and the President shall have the right to appear and to be
represented at such investigation.
(4) If as a result of the investigation a resolution is passed by a majority
of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House by which the
charge was investigated or caused to be investigated, declaring that the charge
preferred against the President has been sustained, such resolution shall have
the effect of removing the President from his office as from the date on which
the resolution is so passed.
62. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of President
and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy.—(1) An
election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of
President shall be completed before the expiration of the term.
 (2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of President occurring by
reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon
as possible after, and in no case later than six months from, the date of
occurrence of the vacancy; and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall,
subject to the provisions of article 56, be entitled to hold office for the full term
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
63. The Vice-President of India.—There shall be a Vice-President of India.
64. The Vice-President to be ex officio Chairman of the Council of
States.—The Vice-President shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of the
States and shall not hold any other office of profit:
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
30
Provided that during any period when the Vice-President acts as
President or discharges the functions of the President under article 65, he shall
not perform the duties of the office of Chairman of the Council of States and
shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of the
Council of States under article 97.
 65. The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his
functions during casual vacancies in the office, or during the absence,
of President.—(1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office
of the President by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise,
the Vice-President shall act as President until the date on which a new
President elected in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter to fill such
vacancy enters upon his office.
(2) When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to
absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President shall discharge his
functions until the date on which the President resumes his duties.
(3) The Vice-President shall, during, and in respect of, the period while
he is so acting as, or discharging the functions of, President, have all the
powers and immunities of the President and be entitled to such emoluments,
allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law and,
until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and
privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.
66. Election of Vice-President.—(1) The Vice-President shall be
elected by the 1
[members of an electoral college consisting of the members of
both Houses of Parliament] in accordance with the system of proportional
representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such
election shall be by secret ballot.
(2) The Vice-President shall not be a member of either House of
Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State, and if a member of
either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State be
elected Vice-President, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that
House on the date on which he enters upon his office as Vice-President.
(3) No person shall be eligible for election as Vice-President unless he—(a) is a citizen of India;
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years; and
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Eleventh Amendment) Act, 1961, s. 2, for "members of both
Houses of Parliament assembled at a joint meeting" (w.e.f. 19-12-1961).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
31
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the Council of States.
(4) A person shall not be eligible for election as Vice-President if he
holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of
any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of
the said Governments.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be
deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President or
Vice-President of the Union or the Governor 1
*** of any State or is a Minister
either for the Union or for any State.
67. Term of office of Vice-President.—The Vice-President shall hold
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that—
(a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
President, resign his office;
(b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution
of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of
the Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution
for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen
days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution;
(c) a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term,
continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
68. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of VicePresident and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy.—(1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office
of Vice-President shall be completed before the expiration of the term.
(2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President
occurring by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be
held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person
elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of article 67, be
entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from the date on which he
enters upon his office.
69. Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President.—Every VicePresident shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe before the ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
32
President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation in the following form, that is to say— "I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and
 solemnly affirm
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully
discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.".
70. Discharge of President's functions in other contingencies.—Parliament may make such provision as it thinks fit for the discharge of the
functions of the President in any contingency not provided for in this Chapter. 1
[71. Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a
President or Vice-President.—(1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in
connection with the election of a President or Vice-President shall be inquired
into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be final.
(2) If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is declared
void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him in the exercise and performance
of the powers and duties of the office of President or Vice-President, as the
case may be, on or before the date of the decision of the Supreme Court shall
not be invalidated by reason of that declaration.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law
regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election of a President or
Vice-President.
(4) The election of a person as President or Vice-President shall not be
called in question on the ground of the existence of any vacancy for whatever
reason among the members of the electoral college electing him.]
72. Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit
or commute sentences in certain cases.—(1) The President shall have the
power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to
suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any
offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court
Martial; ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f 10-8-1975) and
further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 10.
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
33
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence
against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the
Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power
conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend,
remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial.
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall affect the power to
suspend, remit or commute a sentence of death exercisable by the Governor 1
***
of a State under any law for the time being in force.
73. Extent of executive power of the Union.—(1) Subject to the
provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of the Union shall extend—(a) to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make
laws; and
(b) to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are
exercisable by the Government of India by virtue of any treaty or
agreement:
Provided that the executive power referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not,
save as expressly provided in this Constitution or in any law made by Parliament,
extend in any State 2
*** to matters with respect to which the Legislature of the
State has also power to make laws.
(2) Until otherwise provided by Parliament, a State and any officer or
authority of a State may, notwithstanding anything in this article, continue to
exercise in matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws for
that State such executive power or functions as the State or officer or authority
thereof could exercise immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution. ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
34
Council of Ministers
74. Council of Ministers to aid and advise President.—1
[(1) There shall
be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise
the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with
such advice:] 2
[Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to
reconsider such advice, either generally or otherwise, and the President shall act
in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.]
(2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by
Ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any court.
75. Other provisions as to Ministers.—(1) The Prime Minister shall be
appointed by the President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the
President on the advice of the Prime Minister. 3
[(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the
Council of Ministers shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of
members of the House of the People.
(1B) A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political
party who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of
the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under
clause (1) for duration of the period commencing from the date of his
disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member
would expire or where he contests any election to either House of Parliament
before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he is declared elected,
whichever is earlier.]
(2) The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
(3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House
of the People.
(4) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the President shall administer
to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the
purpose in the Third Schedule. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s.13, for cl. (1)
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 11 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-1-2004).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
35
(5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a
member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease
to be a Minister.
 (6) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as Parliament
may from time to time by law determine and, until Parliament so determines,
shall be as specified in the Second Schedule.
The Attorney-General for India
76. Attorney-General for India.—(1) The President shall appoint a
person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court to be
Attorney-General for India.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Attorney-General to give advice to the
Government of India upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties
of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by
the President, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this
Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) In the performance of his duties the Attorney-General shall have
right of audience in all courts in the territory of India.
(4) The Attorney-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the
President, and shall receive such remuneration as the President may determine.
Conduct of Government Business
77. Conduct of business of the Government of India.—(1) All
executive action of the Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in
the name of the President.
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the
President shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules1
to
be made by the President, and the validity of an order or instrument which is so
authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order
or instrument made or executed by the President.
(3) The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of
the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation among
Ministers of the said business. 2
(4) * * * *
______________________________________________
1. See notifin No. S.O. 2297, dated the 3rd November, 1958, Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, Pt. II, Sec. 3 (ii), p. 1315, as amended from time to time.
2. Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s.14
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 12 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
36
78. Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information
to the President, etc.—It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister—(a) to communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of
Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and
proposals for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the
affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President may
call for; and
(c) if the President so requires, to submit for the consideration of the
Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a
Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.
CHAPTER II.—PARLIAMENT
General
79. Constitution of Parliament.—There shall be a Parliament for the
Union which shall consist of the President and two Houses to be known
respectively as the Council of States and the House of the People.
80. Composition of the Council of States.—(1) 1
[2
*** The Council of
States] shall consist of—
(a) twelve members to be nominated by the President in accordance
with the provisions of clause (3); and
(b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representatives of
the States 3
[and of the Union territories].
(2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by
representatives of the States 3
[and of the Union territories] shall be in
accordance with the provisions in that behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.
(3) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a)
of clause (1) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical
experience in respect of such matters as the following, namely:—Literature, science, art and social service. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3, for "The Council
of States" (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).
2. The words "Subject to the provisions of para. 4 of the Tenth Schedule," omitted by the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
3. Added by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
37
(4) The representatives of each State 1
*** in the Council of States shall
be elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the
single transferable vote.
(5) The representatives of the 2
[Union territories] in the Council of States
shall be chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe. 3
[81. Composition of the House of the People.—(1) 4
[Subject to the
provisions of article 331 5
***], the House of the People shall consist of—(a) not more than 6
[five hundred and thirty members] chosen by
direct election from territorial constituencies in the States; and
(b) not more than 7
[twenty members] to represent the Union
territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),—(a) there shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in the House
of the People in such manner that the ratio between that number and the
population of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for all States;
and
(b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such
manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and
the number of seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable, the same
throughout the State: 8
[Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a) of this clause shall not be
applicable for the purpose of allotment of seats in the House of the People to
any State so long as the population of that State does not exceed six millions.] ______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid, for "States specified in Part C of First Schedule" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid. for arts. 81 and 82 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 4, for "subject to the
provisions of art. 331" (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).
5. The words and figure "and para. 4 of the Tenth Schedule" omitted by the Constitution
(Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
6. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for
"five hundred and twenty-five members" (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
7. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 2, for "twenty-five
members" (w.e.f. 17-10-1973).
8. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 17-10-1973).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
38
(3) In this article, the expression “population” means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published: 1
[Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of
which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for
the first census taken after the year 2
[2026] have been published, 3
[be
construed,—
(i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to
that clause, as a reference to the 1971 census; and
(ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2) as a reference to
the 4
[2001] census.]]
 82. Readjustment after each census.—Upon the completion of each
census, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States and the
division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such
authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the
House of the People until the dissolution of the then existing House: 5
[Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date
as the President may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect,
any election to the House may be held on the basis of the territorial
constituencies existing before such readjustment:
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken
after the year 6
[2026] have been published, it shall not be necessary to 7
[readjust,—
______________________________________________
1. Added by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 15 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 3, for "2000"
(w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
3. Subs. by s.3, ibid, for certain words (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for "1991"
(w.e.f. 22-6-2003).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 16 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
6. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 4, for "2000"
(w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
7. Subs. by s.4, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
39
(i) the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States as
readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and
(ii) the division of each State into territorial constituencies as may be
readjusted on the basis of the 1
[2001] census,
under this article.]]
83. Duration of Houses of Parliament.—(1) The Council of States
shall not be subject to dissolution, but as nearly as possible one-third of the
members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration of every
second year in accordance with the provisions made in that behalf by
Parliament by law.
(2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for 2
[five years] from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the
expiration of the said period of 2
[five years] shall operate as a dissolution of
the House:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is
in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one
year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after
the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
84. Qualification for membership of Parliament.—A person shall not
be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless he—3
[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some
person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third
Schedule;]
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty
years of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less
than twenty-five years of age; and
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that
behalf by or under any law made by Parliament. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3, for "1991"
(w.e.f. 22-6-2003).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 17, for "five years"
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 13, for "six years" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 3, for cl.(a)
(w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
40
1
[85. Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.—(1) The
President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet at
such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between
its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the
next session.
(2) The President may from time to time—(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of the People.]
86. Right of President to address and send messages to Houses.—(1)
The President may address either House of Parliament or both Houses
assembled together, and for that purpose require the attendance of members.
(2) The President may send messages to either House of Parliament,
whether with respect to a Bill then pending in Parliament or otherwise, and a
House to which any message is so sent shall with all convenient despatch
consider any matter required by the message to be taken into consideration.
87. Special address by the President.—(1) At the commencement of 2
[the first session after each general election to the House of the People and at
the commencement of the first session of each year] the President shall address
both Houses of Parliament assembled together and inform Parliament of the
causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of
either House for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to
in such address 3
***.
88. Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses.—Every Minister and the Attorney-General of India shall have the right to speak
in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, either House, any joint
sitting of the Houses, and any committee of Parliament of which he may be
named a member, but shall not by virtue of this article be entitled to vote. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 6, for art. 85
(w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 7, for "every session"
(w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
3. The words "and for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the House"
omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
41
Officers of Parliament
89. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States.—(1)
The Vice- President of India shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States.
(2) The Council of States shall, as soon as may be, choose a member of
the Council to be Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of
Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member to
be Deputy Chairman thereof.
90. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of
Deputy Chairman.—A member holding office as Deputy Chairman of the
Council of States—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council;
(b) may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed to the
Chairman, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council
passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved
unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the
resolution.
91. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.—(1) While the office of
Chairman is vacant, or during any period when the Vice-President is acting as,
or discharging the functions of, President, the duties of the office shall be
performed by the Deputy Chairman, or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is
also vacant, by such member of the Council of States as the President may
appoint for the purpose.
(2) During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council of
States the Deputy Chairman, or, if he is also absent, such person as may be
determined by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person is present,
such other person as may be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.
92. The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any
sitting of the Council of States, while any resolution for the removal of the
Vice-President from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while
any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman from his office is under
consideration, the Deputy Chairman, shall not, though he is present, preside,
and the provisions of clause (2) of article 91 shall apply in relation to every
such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Chairman, or,
as the case may be, the Deputy Chairman, is absent.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
42
(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take
part in the proceedings of, the Council of States while any resolution for the
removal of the Vice-President from his office is under consideration in the
Council, but, notwithstanding anything in article 100, shall not be entitled to
vote at all on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings.
93. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.—The House of the People shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the
House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as
the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the House shall
choose another member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
94. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Speaker and Deputy Speaker.— A member holding office as Speaker or
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the House of
the People;
(b) may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed, if such
member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is
the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the House of
the People passed by a majority of all the then members of the House:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved
unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the
resolution:
Provided further that, whenever the House of the People is dissolved, the
Speaker shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of
the House of the People after the dissolution.
95. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.—(1) While the office of Speaker
is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or,
if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the House of
the People as the President may appoint for the purpose.
(2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the House of the
People the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined
by the rules of procedure of the House, or, if no such person is present, such other
person as may be determined by the House, shall act as Speaker.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
43
96. The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any
sitting of the House of the People, while any resolution for the removal of the
Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any
resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under
consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall not, though he is present, preside, and
the provisions of clause (2) of article 95 shall apply in relation to every such
sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker, or, as the
case may be, the Deputy Speaker, is absent.
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take
part in the proceedings of, the House of the People while any resolution for his
removal from office is under consideration in the House and shall,
notwithstanding anything in article 100, be entitled to vote only in the first
instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but
not in the case of an equality of votes.
97. Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman
and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.—There shall be paid to the Chairman
and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and to the Speaker and the
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, such salaries and allowances as may
be respectively fixed by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so
made, such salaries and allowances as are specified in the Second Schedule.
98. Secretariat of Parliament.—(1) Each House of Parliament shall
have a separate secretarial staff:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the
creation of posts common to both Houses of Parliament.
(2) Parliament may by law regulate the recruitment, and the conditions
of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of either House of
Parliament.
(3) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (2), the President
may, after consultation with the Speaker of the House of the People or the
Chairman of the Council of States, as the case may be, make rules regulating
the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the
secretarial staff of the House of the People or the Council of States, and any
rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any law made under
the said clause.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
44
Conduct of Business
99. Oath or affirmation by members.—Every member of either House
of Parliament shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the
President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
100. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding
vacancies and quorum.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution,
all questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses shall be
determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other
than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker.
The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the
first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an
equality of votes.
(2) Either House of Parliament shall have power to act notwithstanding
any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in Parliament shall
be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who
was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings. 1
[(3) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the quorum to
constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament shall be one-tenth of the
total number of members of the House.
(4) If at any time during a meeting of a House there is no quorum, it shall
be the duty of the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, either to
adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.]
Disqualifications of Members
101. Vacation of seats.— (1) No person shall be a member of both
Houses of Parliament and provision shall be made by Parliament by law for the
vacation by a person who is chosen a member of both Houses of his seat in one
House or the other. ______________________________________________
1. Cls. (3) and (4) omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 18 (date not
notified). This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
45
(2) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of a House of
the Legislature of a State 1
***, and if a person is chosen a member both of
Parliament and of a House of the Legislature of 2
[a State], then, at the
expiration of such period as may be specified in rules made by the President,
that person’s seat in Parliament shall become vacant, unless he has previously
resigned his seat in the Legislature of the State.
(3) If a member of either House of Parliament—(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 3
[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 102]; or 4
[(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the
Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, and his resignation is
accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,]
his seat shall thereupon become vacant: 5
[Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub-clause (b),
if from information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he
thinks fit, the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, is satisfied that
such resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such
resignation.]
(4) If for a period of sixty days a member of either House of Parliament
is without permission of the House absent from all meetings thereof, the House
may declare his seat vacant:
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall
be taken of any period during which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for
more than four consecutive days. ______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for "such a State" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950, published with the
Ministry of Law, notifn. No. F. 46/50-C, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of
India, Extraordinary, P. 678.
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 2, for "cl. (1) of art.
102" (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-5-1974).
5. Ins. by s.2, ibid. (w.e.f. 19-5-1974).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
46
102. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of
Parliament— 1
[(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India
or the Government of any State, other than an office declared by
Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder;]
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the
citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of
allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament. 2
[Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause] a person shall not be
deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State by reason only that he is a Minister either for the
Union or for such State. 3
[(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House
of Parliament if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.] 4
[103. Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.—(1) If any question arises as to whether a member of either House of Parliament
has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of
article 102, the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and
his decision shall be final. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 19 to read as "(a) if
he holds any such office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of
any State as is declared by Parliament by law to disqualify its holder" (date not
notified). This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 3, for "(2) for the
purposes of this art." (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 20, for art. 103
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 14, for art. 103 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
47
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall
obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such
opinion.]
104. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation
under article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified.—If a person
sits or votes as a member of either House of Parliament before he has complied
with the requirements of article 99, or when he knows that he is not qualified or
that he is disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so
doing by the provisions of any law made by Parliament, he shall be liable in
respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred
rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union.
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members
105. Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the
members and committees thereof.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this
Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of
Parliament, there shall be freedom of speech in Parliament.
(2) No member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in
respect of anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee
thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the
authority of either House of Parliament of any report, paper, votes or proceedings. 1
[(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each
House of Parliament, and of the members and the committees of each House,
shall be such as may from time to time be defined by Parliament by law, and,
until so defined, 2
[shall be those of that House and of its members and
committees immediately before the coming into force of section 15 of the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978.]]. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 21 (date to be
notified). This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 15, for certain
words (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
48
(4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to
persons who by virtue of this Constitution have the right to speak in, and
otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of Parliament or any
committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of Parliament.
106. Salaries and allowances of members.—Members of either House
of Parliament shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may
from time to time be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in
that respect is so made, allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as
were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution applicable in
the case of members of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India.
Legislative Procedure
107. Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.—(1) Subject
to the provisions of articles 109 and 117 with respect to Money Bills and other
financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of Parliament.
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 108 and 109, a Bill shall not be
deemed to have been passed by the Houses of Parliament unless it has been
agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with such amendments
only as are agreed to by both Houses.
(3) A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the
prorogation of the Houses.
(4) A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by
the House of the People shall not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the
People.
(5) A Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having
been passed by the House of the People is pending in the Council of States,
shall, subject to the provisions of article 108, lapse on a dissolution of the
House of the People.
108. Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases.—(1) If after a Bill
has been passed by one House and transmitted to the other House—(a) the Bill is rejected by the other House; or
(b) the Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be
made in the Bill; or
(c) more than six months elapse from the date of the reception of the
Bill by the other House without the Bill being passed by it,
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
49
the President may, unless the Bill has elapsed by reason of a dissolution of the
House of the People, notify to the Houses by message if they are sitting or by
public notification if they are not sitting, his intention to summon them to meet
in a joint sitting for the purpose of deliberating and voting on the Bill:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to a Money Bill.
(2) In reckoning any such period of six months as is referred to in
clause (1), no account shall be taken of any period during which the House
referred to in sub-clause (c) of that clause is prorogued or adjourned for more
than four consecutive days.
(3) Where the President has under clause (1) notified his intention of
summoning the Houses to meet in a joint sitting, neither House shall proceed
further with the Bill, but the President may at any time after the date of his
notification summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose specified
in the notification and, if he does so, the Houses shall meet accordingly.
(4) If at the joint sitting of the two Houses the Bill, with such amendments,
if any, as are agreed to in joint sitting, is passed by a majority of the total number
of members of both Houses present and voting, it shall be deemed for the
purposes of this Constitution to have been passed by both Houses:
Provided that at a joint sitting—(a) if the Bill, having been passed by one House, has not been passed
by the other House with amendments and returned to the House in which
it originated, no amendment shall be proposed to the Bill other than such
amendments (if any) as are made necessary by the delay in the passage
of the Bill;
(b) if the Bill has been so passed and returned, only such amendments as
aforesaid shall be proposed to the Bill and such other amendments as are
relevant to the matters with respect to which the Houses have not agreed,
and the decision of the person presiding as to the amendments which are admissible
under this clause shall be final.
(5) A joint sitting may be held under this article and a Bill passed
thereat, notwithstanding that a dissolution of the House of the People has
intervened since the President notified his intention to summon the Houses to
meet therein.
109. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(1) A Money Bill
shall not be introduced in the Council of States.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
50
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it
shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations and the
Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its
receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its
recommendations and the House of the People may thereupon either accept or
reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council of States.
(3) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the
Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both
Houses with the amendments recommended by the Council of States and
accepted by the House of the People.
(4) If the House of the People does not accept any of the
recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to
have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the
House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the
Council of States.
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the House of the People and transmitted to
the Council of States for its recommendations is not returned to the House of
the People within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have
been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in
which it was passed by the House of the People.
110. Definition of “Money Bills”.—(1) For the purposes of this
Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions
dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any
tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any
guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with
respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by
the Government of India;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of
India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any
such Fund;
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
51
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India
or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or
the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or
(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in
sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the
demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or
regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the
decision of the Speaker of the House of the People thereon shall be final.
(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted
to the Council of States under article 109, and when it is presented to the
President for assent under article 111, the certificate of the Speaker of the
House of the People signed by him that it is a Money Bill.
111. Assent to Bills.—When a Bill has been passed by the Houses of
Parliament, it shall be presented to the President, and the President shall declare
either that he assents to the Bill, or that he withholds assent therefrom:
Provided that the President may, as soon as possible after the
presentation to him of a Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill
to the Houses with a message requesting that they will reconsider the Bill or
any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability
of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message,
and when a Bill is so returned, the Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly,
and if the Bill is passed again by the Houses with or without amendment and
presented to the President for assent, the President shall not withhold assent
therefrom.
Procedure in Financial Matters
112. Annual financial statement.—(1) The President shall in respect of
every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a
statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India
for that year, in this Part referred to as the "annual financial statement''.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial
statement shall show separately— 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
52
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this
Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of
India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be
made from the Consolidated Fund of India,
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the President and other
expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy
Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker of the House of the People;
(c) debt charges for which the Government of India is liable
including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and
other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and
redemption of debt;
(d) (i) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in
respect of Judges of the Supreme Court;
(ii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Federal
Court;
(iii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of any High
Court which exercises jurisdiction in relation to any area included in the
territory of India or which at any time before the commencement of this
Constitution exercised jurisdiction in relation to any area included in 1
[a Governor's Province of the Dominion of India];
(e) the salary, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India;
(f) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of
any court or arbitral tribunal;
(g) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution or by
Parliament by law to be so charged.
113. Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates.—(1) So
much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated
Fund of India shall not be submitted to the vote of Parliament, but nothing in
this clause shall be construed as preventing the discussion in either House of
Parliament of any of those estimates. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for
"a Province corresponding to a State specified in Part A of the First Schedule"
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
53
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be
submitted in the form of demands for grants to the House of the People, and the
House of the People shall have power to assent, or to refuse to assent, to any
demand, or to assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount
specified therein.
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation
of the President.
114. Appropriation Bills.—(1) As soon as may be after the grants under
article 113 have been made by the House of the People, there shall be
introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund
of India of all moneys required to meet—
(a) the grants so made by the House of the People; and
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India but
not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously
laid before Parliament.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in either House of
Parliament which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the
destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of any expenditure
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the decision of the person
presiding as to whether an amendment is inadmissible under this clause shall be
final.
(3) Subject to the provisions of articles 115 and 116, no money shall be
withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation
made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
115. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.—(1) The President
shall—
 (a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the
provisions of article 114 to be expended for a particular service for the
current financial year is found to be insufficient for the purposes of that
year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for
supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new service not
contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year; or
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial
year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year,
cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament another statement
showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to
the House of the People a demand for such excess, as the case may be.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
54
(2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall have effect in
relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law
to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of India to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand
as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the
expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant and the law to be
made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of India to meet such expenditure or grant.
116. Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional
grants.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this
Chapter, the House of the People shall have power—(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated
expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of
the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and
the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114 in
relation to that expenditure;
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the
resources of India when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite
character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details
ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current
service of any financial year,
and Parliament shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from
the Consolidated Fund of India for the purposes for which the said grants are made.
(2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to
the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under that
clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any
expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made
for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of India to meet such expenditure.
117. Special provisions as to financial Bills.—(1) A Bill or amendment
making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of
clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the
recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be
introduced in the Council of States:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for
the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of
any tax.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
55
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any
of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of
fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for
licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the
imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local
authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed by either
House of Parliament unless the President has recommended to that House the
consideration of the Bill.
Procedure Generally
118. Rules of procedure.—(1) Each House of Parliament may make
rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure
and the conduct of its business.
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and
standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution with respect to the Legislature of the Dominion of India shall have
effect in relation to Parliament subject to such modifications and adaptations as
may be made therein by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker
of the House of the People, as the case may be.
(3) The President, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council of
States and the Speaker of the House of the People, may make rules as to the
procedure with respect to joint sittings of, and communications between, the
two Houses.
(4) At a joint sitting of the two Houses the Speaker of the House of the
People, or in his absence such person as may be determined by rules of
procedure made under clause (3), shall preside.
119. Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to
financial business.— Parliament may, for the purpose of the timely completion
of financial business, regulate by law the procedure of, and the conduct of
business in, each House of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to
any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
and, if and so far as any provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any
rule made by a House of Parliament under clause (1) of article 118 or with any
rule or standing order having effect in relation to Parliament under clause (2) of
that article, such provision shall prevail. ______________________________________________ The brackets and words "(including the quorum to constitute a meeting of the House"
ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 22 (date not notified).
This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
56
120. Language to be used in Parliament.—(1) Notwithstanding
anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of article 348, business in
Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English:
Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the
House of the People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit
any member who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English to
address the House in his mother-tongue.
(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this article shall, after
the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this
Constitution, have effect as if the words “or in English” were omitted
therefrom.
121. Restriction on discussion in Parliament.—No discussion shall
take place in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the
Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties except upon a
motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of the
Judge as hereinafter provided.
122. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament.—(1) The
validity of any proceedings in Parliament shall not be called in question on the
ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whom powers are vested by
or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of business,
or for maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any
court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.
CHAPTER III.—LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT
123. Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of
Parliament.—(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in
session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it
necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such
Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same
force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to
operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament,
or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are
passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those
resolutions; and
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
57
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.
Explanation.—Where the Houses of Parliament are summoned to
reassemble on different dates, the period of six weeks shall be reckoned from
the later of those dates for the purposes of this clause.
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision
which Parliament would not under this Constitution be competent to enact, it
shall be void. 1
(4)* * * * *
CHAPTER IV.—THE UNION JUDICIARY
124. Establishment and constitution of the Supreme Court.—(1)
There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India
and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than
[seven] other Judges.
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal 2
[on the recommendation of the
National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A] and
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years: 3
[* * * * *] 4
[Provided that]—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
President, resign his office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner
provided in clause (4). ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2 (with retrospective effect) and
omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 16 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
Now “thirty-three” vide the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Act, 2019 (37 of 2019),
s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-8-2019).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 2, for "after consultation with
such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Court in the States as the President may
deem necessary for the purpose" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the
Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and another Vs.
Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
3. The first proviso was omitted by s. 2, ibid. The proviso was as under:—"Provided that in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief
Justice of India shall always be consulted:" This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme
Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and another Vs. Union of
India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid. for "provided further that" This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme
Court in the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and another Vs Union of India
judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
58
1
[(2A) The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be determined by
such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.]
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of the
Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of India and—
(a) has been for at least five years a Judge of a High Court or of
two or more such Courts in succession; or
(b) has been for at least ten years an advocate of a High Court or
of two or more such Courts in succession; or
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist.
Explanation I.—In this clause "High Court'' means a High Court which
exercises, or which at any time before the commencement of this Constitution
exercised, jurisdiction in any part of the territory of India.
Explanation II.—In computing for the purpose of this clause the period
during which a person has been an advocate, any period during which a person has
held judicial office not inferior to that of a district judge after he became an
advocate shall be included.
(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office
except by an order of the President passed after an address by each House of
Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a
majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting
has been presented to the President in the same session for such removal on the
ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
(5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an
address and for the investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a
Judge under clause (4).
(6) Every person appointed to be a Judge of the Supreme Court shall,
before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or
some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according
to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall
plead or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of India. 2
[124A. National Judicial Appointments Commission.—(1) There
shall be a Commission to be known as the National Judicial Appointments
Commission consisting of the following, namely:—______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 3 (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This
amendment has been struck down by the Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocateson-Record Association and another Vs Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015,
AIR 2016 SC 117.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
59
(a) the Chief Justice of India, Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) two other senior Judges of the Supreme Court next to the Chief Justice of India––Members, ex officio;
(c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice––Member, ex officio;
(d) two eminent persons to be nominated by the committee consisting of the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People or where there is no such Leader of Opposition, then, the Leader of single largest Opposition Party in the House of the People––Members:
Provided that one of the eminent person shall be nominated from amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minorities or Women:
Provided further that an eminent person shall be nominated for a period of three years and shall not be eligible for renomination.
(2) No act or proceedings of the National Judicial Appointments Commission shall be questioned or be invalidated merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission.
124B. Functions of Commission.––It shall be the duty of the National Judicial Appointments Commission to—(a) recommend persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India, Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts and other Judges of High Courts;
(b) recommend transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts from one High Court to any other High Court; and
(c) ensure that the person recommended is of ability and integrity.
124C. Power of Parliament to make law.––Parliament may, by law, regulate the procedure for the appointment of Chief Justice of India and other Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges of High Courts and empower the Commission to lay down by regulations the procedure for the discharge of its functions, the manner of selection of persons for appointment and such other matters as may be considered necessary by it.]
125. Salaries, etc., of Judges.—1
[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the Supreme Court such salaries as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries as are specified in the Second Schedule.]
(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such privileges and allowances and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be determined by or under law made by Parliament and, until so determined, to such privileges, allowances and rights as are specified in the Second Schedule: ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2, for cl. (1)
(w.e.f. 1-4-1986).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
60
Provided that neither the privileges nor the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
126. Appointment of acting Chief Justice.—When the office of Chief
Justice of India is vacant or when the Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as the President may appoint for the purpose.
127. Appointment of ad hoc Judges.—(1) If at any time there should not be a quorum of the Judges of the Supreme Court available to hold or continue any session of the Court, 1
[the National Judicial Appointments Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of India, may with the previous consent of the President] and after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned, request in writing the attendance at the sittings of the Court, as an ad hoc Judge, for such period as may be necessary, of a Judge of a High Court duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court to be designated by the Chief Justice of India.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Judge who has been so designated, in priority to other duties of his office, to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court at the time and for the period for which his attendance is required, and while so attending he shall have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges, and shall discharge the duties, of a Judge of the Supreme Court.
128. Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme Court.—Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, 2
[the National Judicial Appointments Commission] may at any time, with the previous consent of the President, request any person who has held the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of the Federal Court 3
[or who has held the office of a Judge of a High Court and is duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court] to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court, and every such person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that Court: ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 4, for "the Chief
Justice of India may, with the previous consent of the President" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015).
This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme Court in the case of Supreme
Court Advocates-on-Record Association and another vs. Union of India in its
judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for "the Chief Justice of India" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment
has been struck down by the Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocateson-Record Association and another Vs. Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-
2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
61
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such
person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that Court unless he consents so
to do.
129. Supreme Court to be a court of record.—The Supreme Court
shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including
the power to punish for contempt of itself.
130. Seat of Supreme Court.—The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or
in such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the
approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
131. Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.—Subject to the
provisions of this Constitution, the Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any
other court, have original jurisdiction in any dispute—
(a) between the Government of India and one or more States; or
(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one
side and one or more other States on the other; or
(c) between two or more States,
if and in so far as the dispute involves any question (whether of law or fact) on which
the existence or extent of a legal right depends: 1
[Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to a dispute arising
out of any treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar
instrument which, having been entered into or executed before the
commencement of this Constitution, continues in operation after such
commencement, or which provides that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to
such a dispute.] 2
[131A. Exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to
questions as to constitutional validity of Central laws.].—Omitted by the
Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 4 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 132. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from
High Courts in certain cases.—(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court
from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court in the territory of
India, whether in a civil, criminal or other proceeding, 3
[if the High Court
certifies under article 134A] that the case involves a substantial question of law
as to the interpretation of this Constitution. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 5, for the proviso
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 17, for "if the High
Court certifies" (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
62
1
(2)* * * * *
(3) Where such a certificate is given, 2
*** any party in the case may
appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that any such question as aforesaid
has been wrongly decided 2
***.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, the expression “final
order” includes an order deciding an issue which, if decided in favour of the
appellant, would be sufficient for the final disposal of the case.
133. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from
High Courts in regard to civil matters.—3
[(1) An appeal shall lie to the
Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding
of a High Court in the territory of India 4
[if the High Court certifies under
article 134A—]
(a) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general
importance; and
(b) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be
decided by the Supreme Court.]
(2) Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any party appealing to the
Supreme Court under clause (1) may urge as one of the grounds in such appeal
that a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution has
been wrongly decided.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, no appeal shall, unless Parliament
by law otherwise provides, lie to the Supreme Court from the judgment, decree or final
order of one Judge of a High Court.
134. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to
criminal matters.—(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any
judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in
the territory of India if the High Court—(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person
and sentenced him to death; or
(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court
subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused
person and sentenced him to death; or
(c) 5
[certifies under article 134A] that the case is a fit one for appeal
to the Supreme Court: ______________________________________________
1. Cl. (2) omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 17, for "if
the High Court certifies" (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2. Certain words omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirtieth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2, for cl. (1)
(w.e.f. 27-2-1973).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.18, for "if the High
Court certifies.—" (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
5. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for "certifies" (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
63
Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to such
provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to
such conditions as the High Court may establish or require.
(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further
powers to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence
in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India subject to such
conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law. 1
[134A. Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court.—Every High
Court, passing or making a judgment, decree, final order, or sentence, referred to
in clause (1) of article 132 or clause (1) of article 133, or clause (1) of article
134,—
(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion; and
(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party
aggrieved, immediately after the passing or making of such judgment,
decree, final order or sentence,
determine, as soon as may be after such passing or making, the question
whether a certificate of the nature referred to in clause (1) of article 132, or
clause (1) of article 133 or, as the case may be, sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of
article 134, may be given in respect of that case.]
135. Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing
law to be exercisable by the Supreme Court.—Until Parliament by law
otherwise provides, the Supreme Court shall also have jurisdiction and powers
with respect to any matter to which the provisions of article 133 or article 134
do not apply if jurisdiction and powers in relation to that matter were
exercisable by the Federal Court immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution under any existing law.
136. Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme Court may, in its
discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree,
determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any
court or tribunal in the territory of India.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment, determination,
sentence or order passed or made by any court or tribunal constituted by or
under any law relating to the Armed Forces.
137. Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court.—Subject
to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or any rules made under
article 145, the Supreme Court shall have power to review any judgment
pronounced or order made by it. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
64
138. Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.—(1) The
Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers with respect to
any of the matters in the Union List as Parliament may by law confer.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers
with respect to any matter as the Government of India and the Government of
any State may by special agreement confer, if Parliament by law provides for
the exercise of such jurisdiction and powers by the Supreme Court.
139. Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain
writs.—Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court power to issue
directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus,
mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for any
purposes other than those mentioned in clause (2) of article 32. 1
[139A. Transfer of certain cases.—2
[(1) Where cases involving the
same or substantially the same questions of law are pending before the
Supreme Court and one or more High Courts or before two or more High
Courts and the Supreme Court is satisfied on its own motion or on an
application made by the Attorney-General of India or by a party to any such
case that such questions are substantial questions of general importance, the
Supreme Court may withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court
or the High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself:
Provided that the Supreme Court may after determining the said
questions of law return any case so withdrawn together with a copy of its
judgment on such questions to the High Court from which the case has been
withdrawn, and the High Court shall on receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of
the case in conformity with such judgment.]
(2) The Supreme Court may, if it deems it expedient so to do for the ends
of justice, transfer any case, appeal or other proceedings pending before any
High Court to any other High Court.]
140. Ancillary powers of the Supreme Court.—Parliament may by
law make provision for conferring upon the Supreme Court such supplemental
powers not inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution as may
appear to be necessary or desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court more
effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by or under this
Constitution. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 21, for cl. (1)
(w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
65
141. Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts.—The law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts within
the territory of India.
142. Enforcement of decrees and orders of the Supreme Court and
orders as to discovery, etc.—(1) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its
jurisdiction may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing
complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it, and any decree so
passed or order so made shall be enforceable throughout the territory of India in
such manner as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the President
may by order1
prescribe.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, as respects the whole of the territory of
India, have all and every power to make any order for the purpose of securing
the attendance of any person, the discovery or production of any documents, or
the investigation or punishment of any contempt of itself.
143. Power of the President to consult the Supreme Court.—(1) If at
any time it appears to the President that a question of law or fact has arisen, or
is likely to arise, which is of such a nature and of such public importance that it
is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court upon it, he may refer
the question to that Court for consideration and the Court may, after such
hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon.
(2) The President may, notwithstanding anything in 2
*** the proviso to
article 131, refer a dispute of the kind mentioned in the 3
[said proviso] to the
Supreme Court for opinion and the Supreme Court shall, after such hearing as it
thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon.
144. Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the Supreme
Court.—All authorities, civil and judicial, in the territory of India shall act in
aid of the Supreme Court. 4
[144A. [Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to
constitutional validity of laws.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).]
145. Rules of Court, etc.—(1) Subject to the provisions of any law
made by Parliament, the Supreme Court may from time to time, with the
approval of the President, make rules for regulating generally the practice and
procedure of the Court including—
(a) rules as to the persons practising before the Court; ______________________________________________
1. See the Supreme Court (Decrees and Orders) Enforcement Order, 1954 (C.O. 47).
2. The words, brackets and figure "clause (i) of" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for "said clause" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
66
(b) rules as to the procedure for hearing appeals and other matters
pertaining to appeals including the time within which appeals to the
Court are to be entered;
(c) rules as to the proceedings in the Court for the enforcement of
any of the rights conferred by Part III; 1
[(cc) rules as to the proceedings in the Court under 2
[article
139A];]
(d) rules as to the entertainment of appeals under sub-clause (c) of
clause (1) of article 134;
(e) rules as to the conditions subject to which any judgment
pronounced or order made by the Court may be reviewed and the
procedure for such review including the time within which applications
to the Court for such review are to be entered;
(f) rules as to the costs of and incidental to any proceedings in the
Court and as to the fees to be charged in respect of proceedings therein;
(g) rules as to the granting of bail;
(h) rules as to stay of proceedings;
(i) rules providing for the summary determination of any appeal
which appears to the Court to be frivolous or vexatious or brought for
the purpose of delay;
(j) rules as to the procedure for inquiries referred to in
clause (1) of article 317.
(2) Subject to the 3
[provisions of 4
*** clause (3)], rules made under this
article may fix the minimum number of Judges who are to sit for any purpose,
and may provide for the powers of single Judges and Division Courts.
(3) 5
[4
***The minimum number] of Judges who are to sit for the purpose
of deciding any case involving a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of this Constitution or for the purpose of hearing any reference
under article 143 shall be five: ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 6, for "articles 131A
and 139A" (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for "provisions
of clause (3)" (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 6
(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for "The
minimum number" (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
67
Provided that, where the Court hearing an appeal under any of the
provisions of this Chapter other than article 132 consists of less than five
Judges and in the course of the hearing of the appeal the Court is satisfied that
the appeal involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this
Constitution the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the
appeal, such Court shall refer the question for opinion to a Court constituted as
required by this clause for the purpose of deciding any case involving such a
question and shall on receipt of the opinion dispose of the appeal in conformity
with such opinion.
(4) No judgment shall be delivered by the Supreme Court save in open
Court, and no report shall be made under article 143 save in accordance with an
opinion also delivered in open Court.
(5) No judgment and no such opinion shall be delivered by the Supreme
Court save with the concurrence of a majority of the Judges present at the
hearing of the case, but nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent a
Judge who does not concur from delivering a dissenting judgment or opinion.
146. Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court.—(1) Appointments of officers and servants of the Supreme Court shall be made
by the Chief Justice of India or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he
may direct:
Provided that the President may by rule require that in such cases as may
be specified in the rule, no person not already attached to the Court shall be
appointed to any office connected with the Court, save after consultation with
the Union Public Service Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the
conditions of service of officers and servants of the Supreme Court shall be
such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of India or by
some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice of
India to make rules for the purpose:
Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far as they relate
to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, require the approval of the President.
(3) The administrative expenses of the Supreme Court, including all
salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and
servants of the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India,
and any fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of that Fund.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
68
147. Interpretation.—In this Chapter and in Chapter V of Part VI,
references to any substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this
Constitution shall be construed as including references to any substantial
question of law as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935
(including any enactment amending or supplementing that Act), or of any
Order in Council or order made thereunder, or of the Indian Independence
Act, 1947, or of any order made thereunder.
CHAPTER V.—COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL OF INDIA148. Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.—(1) There shall be a
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India who shall be appointed by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal and shall only be removed from
office in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
(2) Every person appointed to be the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India shall, before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the
President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(3) The salary and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General shall be such as may be determined by Parliament by law and,
until they are so determined, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule:
Provided that neither the salary of a Comptroller and Auditor-General
nor his rights in respect of leave of absence, pension or age of retirement shall
be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall not be eligible for further
office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any
State after he has ceased to hold his office.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any law made by
Parliament, the conditions of service of persons serving in the Indian Audit and
Accounts Department and the administrative powers of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the
President after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(6) The administrative expenses of the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or
in respect of persons serving in that office, shall be charged upon the
Consolidated Fund of India. 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
69
149. Duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.—The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall perform such duties and exercise
such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the States and of
any other authority or body as may be prescribed by or under any law made by
Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall perform such
duties and exercise such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of
the States as were conferred on or exercisable by the Auditor-General of India
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution in relation to the
accounts of the Dominion of India and of the Provinces respectively. 1
[150. Form of accounts of the Union and of the States.—The
accounts of the Union and of the States shall be kept in such form as the
President may, 2
[on the advice of] the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India, prescribe.]
151. Audit reports.—(1) The reports of the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral of India relating to the accounts of the Union shall be submitted to the
President, who shall cause them to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(2) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating
to the accounts of a State shall be submitted to the Governor 3
*** of the State,
who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 27, for art.150
(w.e.f. 1-4-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 22, for "after
consultation with" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
70
PART VI
THE STATES 1
***
CHAPTER I.—GENERAL
152. Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the
expression “State” 2
[does not include the State of Jammu and Kashmir].
CHAPTER II.—THE EXECUTIVE
The Governor
153. Governors of States.—There shall be a Governor for each State: 3
[Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent the appointment of
the same person as Governor for two or more States.]
154. Executive power of State.—(1) The executive power of the State
shall be vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him either directly or
through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Nothing in this article shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by
any existing law on any other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the State from conferring
by law functions on any authority subordinate to the Governor.
155. Appointment of Governor.—The Governor of a State shall be
appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
156. Term of office of Governor.—(1) The Governor shall hold office
during the pleasure of the President.
(2) The Governor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
President, resign his office.
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article, a Governor shall
hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his
office: ______________________________________________
1. The words "IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE" omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch. ibid., for "means a State specified in Part A of the First
Schedule" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Added by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
71
Provided that a Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his
term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
157. Qualifications for appointment as Governor.—No person shall
be eligible for appointment as Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has
completed the age of thirty-five years.
158. Conditions of Governor's office.—(1) The Governor shall not be a
member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any
State specified in the First Schedule, and if a member of either House of
Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any such State be appointed
Governor, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date
on which he enters upon his office as Governor.
(2) The Governor shall not hold any other office of profit.
(3) The Governor shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of
his official residences and shall be also entitled to such emoluments,
allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law and,
until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and
privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule. 1
[(3A) Where the same person is appointed as Governor of two or more
States, the emoluments and allowances payable to the Governor shall be allocated
among the States in such proportion as the President may by order determine.]
(4) The emoluments and allowances of the Governor shall not be
diminished during his term of office.
159. Oath or affirmation by the Governor.—Every Governor and
every person discharging the functions of the Governor shall, before entering
upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of the
High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the State, or, in his absence, the
senior most Judge of that Court available, an oath or affirmation in the
following form, that is to say—
“I, A. B., do swear in the name of God that I will faithfully execute the
solemnly affirm
office of Governor (or discharge the functions of the Governor) of
.........(name of the State) and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect
and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the
service and well-being of the people of ..……(name of the State).”. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
72
160. Discharge of the functions of the Governor in certain
contingencies.—The President may make such provision as he thinks fit for the
discharge of the functions of the Governor of a State in any contingency not
provided for in this Chapter.
161. Power of Governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit
or commute sentences in certain cases.—The Governor of a State shall have
the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or
to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any
offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the
State extends.
162. Extent of executive power of State.—Subject to the provisions of
this Constitution, the executive power of a State shall extend to the matters with
respect to which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws:
Provided that in any matter with respect to which the Legislature of a
State and Parliament have power to make laws, the executive power of the
State shall be subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly
conferred by this Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon the
Union or authorities thereof.
Council of Ministers
163. Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor.—(1) There shall
be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the
Governor in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is by or under this
Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion.
(2) If any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as
respects which the Governor is by or under this Constitution required to act in
his discretion, the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and
the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called in question on
the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion.
(3) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by
Ministers to the Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.
164. Other provisions as to Ministers.—(1) The Chief Minister shall
be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the
Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers shall hold
office during the pleasure of the Governor:
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
73
Provided that in the States of 1
[Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand], Madhya
Pradesh and 2
[Odisha] there shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who
may in addition be in charge of the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and
backward classes or any other work. 3
[(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister, in
the Council of Ministers in a State shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total
number of members of the Legislative Assembly of that State:
Provided that the number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister in a
State shall not be less than twelve:
Provided further that where the total number of Ministers including the
Chief Minister in the Council of Ministers in any State at the commencement of
the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003 exceeds the said fifteen
per cent. or the number specified in the first proviso, as the case may be, then
the total number of Ministers in that State shall be brought in conformity with
the provisions of this clause within six months from such date4
as the President
may by public notification appoint.
(1B) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of
the Legislature of a State having Legislative Council belonging to any political
party who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2
of the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister
under clause (1) for duration of the period commencing from the date of his
disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member
would expire or where he contests any election to the Legislative Assembly of
a State or either House of the Legislature of a State having Legislative Council,
as the case may be, before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he is
declared elected, whichever is earlier.]
(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the
Legislative Assembly of the State.
(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Governor shall
administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set
out for the purpose in the Third Schedule. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-fourth Amendment) Act, 2006, s. 2, for "Bihar"
(w.e.f. 12-6-2006).
2. Subs. by the Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011 (15 of 2011), s. 4, for "Orissa"
(w.e.f. 1-11-2011).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-1-2004).
4. 7-1-2004, vide notification number S.O. 21(E), dated 7-1-2004.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
74
(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a
member of the Legislature of the State shall at the expiration of that period
cease to be a Minister.
(5) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislature
of the State may from time to time by law determine and, until the Legislature of the
State so determines, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule.
The Advocate-General for the State
165. Advocate-General for the State.—(1) The Governor of each State
shall appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of a High Court
to be Advocate-General for the State.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Advocate-General to give advice to the
Government of the State upon such legal matters, and to perform such other
duties of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to
him by the Governor, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or
under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The Advocate-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the
Governor, and shall receive such remuneration as the Governor may determine.
Conduct of Government Business
166. Conduct of Business of the Government of a State.—(1) All
executive action of the Government of a State shall be expressed to be taken in
the name of the Governor.
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the
Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to
be made by the Governor, and the validity of an order or instrument which is so
authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order
or instrument made or executed by the Governor.
(3) The Governor shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of
the business of the Government of the State, and for the allocation among
Ministers of the said business in so far as it is not business with respect to which
the Governor is by or under this Constitution required to act in his discretion.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
75
1
(4)* * * * *
167. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of
information to Governor, etc.—It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of
each State—
(a) to communicate to the Governor of the State all decisions of the
Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the
State and proposals for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the
affairs of the State and proposals for legislation as the Governor may call
for; and
(c) if the Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the
Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a
Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.
CHAPTER III.—THE STATE LEGISLATURE
General
168. Constitution of Legislatures in States.—(1) For every State there
shall be a Legislature which shall consist of the Governor, and—(a) in the States of 2
*** 3
[Andhra Pradesh], Bihar, 4
*** 5
[Madhya
Pradesh], 6
*** 7
[Maharashtra], 8
[Karnataka], 9
*** ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 28 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977)
and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 23
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. The words "Andhra Pradesh," omitted by the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council
(Abolition) Act, 1985 (34 of 1985), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-6-1985).
3. Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005 (1 of 2006), s. 3
(w.e.f. 30-3-2007).
4. The word "Bombay" omitted by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960)
s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
6. The words "Tamil Nadu," omitted by the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council (Abolition)
Act, 1986 (40 of 1986), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-11-1986).
7. Ins. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
8. Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (31 of 1973), s. 4, for
"Mysore" (w.e.f. 1-11-1973), which was inserted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 8(1) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
9. The word "Punjab," omitted by the Punjab Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969
(46 of 1969), s. 4 (w.e.f. 7-1-1970).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
76
1
[2
[Tamil Nadu, Telangana]] 3
[and Uttar Pradesh], two Houses;
(b) in other States, one House.
(2) Where there are two Houses of the Legislature of a State, one shall
be known as the Legislative Council and the other as the Legislative Assembly,
and where there is only one House, it shall be known as the Legislative
Assembly.
169. Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in States.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in article 168, Parliament may by law provide for the
abolition of the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council or for the
creation of such a Council in a State having no such Council, if the Legislative
Assembly of the State passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the
total membership of the Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-thirds
of the members of the Assembly present and voting.
(2) Any law referred to in clause (1) shall contain such provisions for the
amendment of this Constitution as may be necessary to give effect to the
provisions of the law and may also contain such supplemental, incidental and
consequential provisions as Parliament may deem necessary.
(3) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be an amendment of this
Constitution for the purposes of article 368. 4
[170. Composition of the Legislative Assemblies.—(1) Subject to the
provisions of article 333, the Legislative Assembly of each State shall consist
of not more than five hundred, and not less than sixty, members chosen by
direct election from territorial constituencies in the State.
(2) For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be divided into
territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the population
of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as
practicable, be the same throughout the State. ______________________________________________
2. The words "Tamil Nadu" ins. by the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010
(16 of 2010), s. 3 (date to be notified).
2. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 (6 of 2014), s. 96, for "Tamil
Nadu" (w.e.f. 1-6-2014).
3. Subs. by the West Bengal Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969 (20 of 1969), s. 4
for "Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal" (w.e.f. 1-8-1969).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 9, for art, 170
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
77
1
[Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “population” means the
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant
figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding
census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the
relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2
[2026] have been
published, be construed as a reference to the 3
[2001] census.]
(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territorial
constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as
Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the
Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly: 4
[Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date
as the President may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect,
any election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the
territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment:
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken
after the year 2
[2026] have been published, it shall not be necessary to 5
[readjust—
(i) the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State
as readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and
(ii) the division of such State into territorial constituencies as may be
readjusted on the basis of the 3
[2001] census,
under this clause.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 29, for the
Explanation (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5, for "2000"
(w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4, for "1991"
(w.e.f. 22-6-2003). The figures "1991" were substituted for the original figures "1971"
by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5 (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 29 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5, for certain
words (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
78
171. Composition of the Legislative Councils.—(1) The total number
of members in the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council shall
not exceed 1
[one-third] of the total number of members in the Legislative
Assembly of that State:
Provided that the total number of members in the Legislative Council of
a State shall in no case be less than forty.
(2) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the composition of the
Legislative Council of a State shall be as provided in clause (3).
(3) Of the total number of members of the Legislative Council of a
State—
(a) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by electorates
consisting of members of municipalities, district boards and such other
local authorities in the State as Parliament may by law specify;
(b) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates
consisting of persons residing in the State who have been for at least
three years graduates of any university in the territory of India or have
been for at least three years in possession of qualifications prescribed by
or under any law made by Parliament as equivalent to that of a graduate
of any such university;
(c) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates
consisting of persons who have been for at least three years engaged in
teaching in such educational institutions within the State, not lower in
standard than that of a secondary school, as may be prescribed by or
under any law made by Parliament;
(d) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by the members of
the Legislative Assembly of the State from amongst persons who are not
members of the Assembly;
(e) the remainder shall be nominated by the Governor in accordance
with the provisions of clause (5).
(4) The members to be elected under sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of
clause (3) shall be chosen in such territorial constituencies as may be prescribed ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 10, for "one-fourth"
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
79
by or under any law made by Parliament, and the elections under the said
sub-clauses and under sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be held in
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the
single transferable vote.
(5) The members to be nominated by the Governor under sub-clause (e)
of clause (3) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical
experience in respect of such matters as the following, namely:—Literature, science, art, co-operative movement and social service.
172. Duration of State Legislatures.—(1) Every Legislative Assembly
of every State, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for 1
[five years] from the
date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said
period of 1
[five years] shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is
in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one
year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after
the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
(2) The Legislative Council of a State shall not be subject to dissolution,
but as nearly as possible one-third of the members thereof shall retire as soon as
may be on the expiration of every second year in accordance with the
provisions made in that behalf by Parliament by law.
173. Qualification for membership of the State Legislature.—A
person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislature of a
State unless he—
2
[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some
person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third
Schedule;] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 30, for "five years"
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 24, for "six years" (w.e.f. 6-9-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4, for cl. (a)
(w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
80
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than
twenty-five years of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative
Council, not less than thirty years of age; and
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that
behalf by or under any law made by Parliament. 1
[174. Sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation and
dissolution.—(1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or
each House of the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he
thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one
session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The Governor may from time to time—(a) prorogue the House or either House;
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.]
175. Right of Governor to address and send messages to the House
or Houses.—(1) The Governor may address the Legislative Assembly or, in
the case of a State having a Legislative Council, either House of the Legislature
of the State, or both Houses assembled together, and may for that purpose
require the attendance of members.
(2) The Governor may send messages to the House or Houses of the
Legislature of the State, whether with respect to a Bill then pending in the
Legislature or otherwise, and a House to which any message is so sent shall
with all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the message to be
taken into consideration.
176. Special address by the Governor.—(1) At the commencement of 2
[the first session after each general election to the Legislative Assembly and at
the commencement of the first session of each year], the Governor shall
address the Legislative Assembly or, in the case of a State having a Legislative
Council, both Houses assembled together and inform the Legislature of the
causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of the
House or either House for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters
referred to in such address 3
***. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 8, for art.174
(w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for "every session" (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
3. The words "and for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the
House" omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
81
177. Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the
Houses.—Every Minister and the Advocate-General for a State shall have the
right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Legislative Assembly of the State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative
Council, both Houses, and to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of, any committee of the Legislature of which he may be named a
member, but shall not, by virtue of this article, be entitled to vote.
Officers of the State Legislature
178. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly.—Every Legislative Assembly of a State shall, as soon as may be,
choose two members of the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy
Speaker thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker
becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose another member to be Speaker or
Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
179. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Speaker and Deputy Speaker.—A member holding office as Speaker or
Deputy Speaker of an Assembly—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such
member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is
the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the
Assembly passed by a majority of all the then members of the Assembly:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved
unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the
resolution:
Provided further that, whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker
shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the
Assembly after the dissolution.
180. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.—(1) While the office of Speaker
is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or,
if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the Assembly
as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.
(2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly
the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined
by the rules of procedure of the Assembly, or, if no such person is present, such
other person as may be determined by the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
82
181. The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any
sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolution for the removal of the
Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any
resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under
consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall not, though he is present, preside, and
the provisions of clause (2) of article 180 shall apply in relation to every such
sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker or, as the
case may be, the Deputy Speaker, is absent.
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take
part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for
his removal from office is under consideration in the Assembly and shall,
notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled to vote only in the first
instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but
not in the case of an equality of votes.
182. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative
Council.—The Legislative Council of every State having such Council shall, as
soon as may be, choose two members of the Council to be respectively
Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of Chairman
or Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member
to be Chairman or Deputy Chairman, as the case may be.
183. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Chairman and Deputy Chairman.—A member holding office as Chairman or
Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council—(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council;
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such
member is the Chairman, to the Deputy Chairman, and if such member is
the Deputy Chairman, to the Chairman, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council
passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless
at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution.
184. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.—(1) While the office of
Chairman is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy
Chairman or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, by such member
of the Council as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
83
(2) During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council
the Deputy Chairman or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined
by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person is present, such
other person as may be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.
185. The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any
sitting of the Legislative Council, while any resolution for the removal of the
Chairman from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while any
resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman from his office is under
consideration, the Deputy Chairman, shall not, though he is present, preside,
and the provisions of clause (2) of article 184 shall apply in relation to every
such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Chairman or, as
the case may be, the Deputy Chairman is absent.
(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take
part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Council while any resolution for his
removal from office is under consideration in the Council and shall,
notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled to vote only in the first
instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but
not in the case of an equality of votes.
186. Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker
and the Chairman and Deputy Chairman.—There shall be paid to the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and to the
Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council, such salaries
and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislature of the State by
law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances
as are specified in the Second Schedule.
187. Secretariat of State Legislature.—(1) The House or each House
of the Legislature of a State shall have a separate secretarial staff:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall, in the case of the Legislature
of a State having a Legislative Council, be construed as preventing the creation
of posts common to both Houses of such Legislature.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law regulate the recruitment, and
the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the
House or Houses of the Legislature of the State.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
84
(3) Until provision is made by the Legislature of the State under clause (2),
the Governor may, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case may be, make rules
regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the
secretarial staff of the Assembly or the Council, and any rules so made shall have
effect subject to the provisions of any law made under the said clause.
Conduct of Business
188. Oath or affirmation by members.—Every member of the
Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State shall, before taking
his seat, make and subscribe before the Governor, or some person appointed in
that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the
purpose in the Third Schedule.
189. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding
vacancies and quorum.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution,
all questions at any sitting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be
determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other
than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such.
The Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the
first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an
equality of votes.
(2) A House of the Legislature of a State shall have power to act
notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings
in the Legislature of a State shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered
subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or
otherwise took part in the proceedings. 1
[(3) Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, the
quorum to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be
ten members or one-tenth of the total number of members of the House,
whichever is greater.
(4) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the
Legislative Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the
Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or
to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.] ______________________________________________
1. Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 31 (date not
notified). This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
85
Disqualifications of Members
190. Vacation of seats.—(1) No person shall be a member of both
Houses of the Legislature of a State and provision shall be made by the
Legislature of the State by law for the vacation by a person who is chosen a
member of both Houses of his seat in one house or the other.
(2) No person shall be a member of the Legislatures of two or more
States specified in the First Schedule and if a person is chosen a member of the
Legislatures of two or more such States, then, at the expiration of such period
as may be specified in rules1 made by the President, that person's seat in the
Legislatures of all such States shall become vacant, unless he has previously
resigned his seat in the Legislatures of all but one of the States.
(3) If a member of a House of the Legislature of a State—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 2
[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 191]; or 3
[(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the
speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, and his resignation is
accepted by the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be,]
his seat shall thereupon become vacant: 4
[Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub-clause (b),
if from information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he
thinks fit, the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, is satisfied that such
resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.]
(4) If for a period of sixty days a member of a House of the Legislature
of a State is without permission of the House absent from all meetings thereof,
the House may declare his seat vacant:
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall
be taken of any period during which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for
more than four consecutive days. ______________________________________________
1. See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950 published by the
Ministry of Law Notification number F. 46/50-C, dated the 26th January, 1950,
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, p. 678.
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 4, for "clause (1) of
article 191" (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
3 Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19-5-1974).
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 19-5-1974).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
86
191. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative
Assembly or Legislative Council of a State—1
[(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or
the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule, other than
an office declared by the Legislature of the State by law not to disqualify
its holder;]
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the
citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of
allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament. 2
[Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause], a person shall not be
deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State specified in the First Schedule by reason only that he
is a Minister either for the Union or for such State. 3
[(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of the
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State if he is so disqualified
under the Tenth Schedule.] 4
[192. Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.—(1)
If any question arises as to whether a member of a House of the Legislature of a
State has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1)
of article 191, the question shall be referred for the decision of the Governor
and his decision shall be final. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 32 to read as "(a) if
he holds any such office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of
any State specified in the First Schedule as is declared by Parliament by law to
disqualify its holder" (date not notified). This amendment was omitted by the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 5, for "(2) For the
purposes of this article" (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 33, for art. 192
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 25, for art. 192 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
87
 (2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Governor shall
obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such
opinion.]
193. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation
under article 188 or when not qualified or when disqualified.—If a person
sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative
Council of a State before he has complied with the requirements of article 188,
or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is disqualified for
membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so doing by the provisions of
any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of the State, he shall be liable in
respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred
rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the State.
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of State Legislatures
and their Members
194. Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of the
members and committees thereof.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this
Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of the
Legislature, there shall be freedom of speech in the Legislature of every State.
(2) No member of the Legislature of a State shall be liable to any
proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in
the Legislature or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in
respect of the publication by or under the authority of a House of such a
Legislature of any report, paper, votes or proceedings. 1
[(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of a House
of the Legislature of a State, and of the members and the committees of a
House of such Legislature, shall be such as may from time to time be defined ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 34 to read as
follows :
"(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of a House of the
Legislature of a State, and of the members and the committees of a House of such
Legislature, shall be those of that House, and of its members and Committees, at the
commencement of section 34 of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act,
1976, and as may be evolved by such House of the House of the People, and of its
members and committees where such House is the Legislative Assembly and in
accordance with those of the Council of States, and of its members and committees
where such House is the Legislative Council." (date not notified). This amendment
was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 45
(w.e.f. 19-6-1979)."
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
88
by the Legislature by law, and, until so defined, 1
[shall be those of that House
and of its members and committees immediately before the coming into force
of section 26 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978].
(4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to
persons who by virtue of this Constitution have the right to speak in, and
otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of the Legislature of a State
or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of that Legislature.
195. Salaries and allowances of members.—Members of the
Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council of a State shall be entitled to
receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined,
by the Legislature of the State by law and, until provision in that respect is so
made, salaries and allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as were
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution applicable in the
case of members of the Legislative Assembly of the corresponding Province.
Legislative Procedure
196. Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.—(1) Subject
to the provisions of articles 198 and 207 with respect to Money Bills and other
financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of the Legislature of a State
which has a Legislative Council.
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 197 and 198, a Bill shall not be
deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of a State having
a Legislative Council unless it has been agreed to by both Houses, either
without amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed to by both
Houses.
(3) A Bill pending in the Legislature of a State shall not lapse by reason
of the prorogation of the House or Houses thereof.
(4) A Bill pending in the Legislative Council of a State which has not
been passed by the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse on a dissolution of the
Assembly.
(5) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly of a State, or
which having been passed by the Legislative Assembly is pending in the
Legislative Council, shall lapse on a dissolution of the Assembly.
197. Restriction on powers of Legislative Council as to Bills other
than Money Bills.—(1) If after a Bill has been passed by the Legislative
Assembly of a State having a Legislative Council and transmitted to the
Legislative Council—
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 26, for certain
words (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
89
(a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or
(b) more than three months elapse from the date on which the Bill is
laid before the Council without the Bill being passed by it; or
(c) the Bill is passed by the Council with amendments to which the
Legislative Assembly does not agree;
the Legislative Assembly may, subject to the rules regulating its procedure, pass the
Bill again in the same or in any subsequent session with or without such amendments,
if any, as have been made, suggested or agreed to by the Legislative Council and then
transmit the Bill as so passed to the Legislative Council.
 (2) If after a Bill has been so passed for the second time by the
Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council—(a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or
(b) more than one month elapses from the date on which the Bill is
laid before the Council without the Bill being passed by it; or
(c) the Bill is passed by the Council with amendments to which the
Legislative Assembly does not agree;
the Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of the
State in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly for the second
time with such amendments, if any, as have been made or suggested by the Legislative
Council and agreed to by the Legislative Assembly.
(3) Nothing in this article shall apply to a Money Bill.
198. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(1) A Money Bill
shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a
State having a Legislative Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative
Council for its recommendations, and the Legislative Council shall within a
period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the
Legislative Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative Assembly
may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the
Legislative Council.
(3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of
the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed
by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council
and accepted by the Legislative Assembly.
(4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
90
recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed
to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the
Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments recommended by the
Legislative Council.
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted
to the Legislative Council for its recommendations is not returned to the
Legislative Assembly within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be
deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period
in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly.
199. Definition of “Money Bills”.—(1) For the purposes of this
Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions
dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any
guarantee by the State, or the amendment of the law with respect to any
financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the State;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund
of the State, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys
from any such Fund;
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of
the State;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on
the Consolidated Fund of the State, or the increasing of the amount of
any such expenditure;
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the
State or the public account of the State or the custody or issue of such
money; or
(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in
sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the
demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or
regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) If any question arises whether a Bill introduced in the Legislature of 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
91
a State which has a Legislative Council is a Money Bill or not, the decision of
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of such State thereon shall be final.
(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted
to the Legislative Council under article 198, and when it is presented to the
Governor for assent under article 200, the certificate of the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.
200. Assent to Bills.—When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative
Assembly of a State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, has
been passed by both Houses of the Legislature of the State, it shall be presented
to the Governor and the Governor shall declare either that he assents to the Bill
or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the
consideration of the President:
Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the
presentation to him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill
together with a message requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider
the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the
desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his
message and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider
the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the House or Houses
with or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the
Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom:
Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve
for the consideration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the
Governor would, if it became law, so derogate from the powers of the High
Court as to endanger the position which that Court is by this Constitution
designed to fill.
201. Bills reserved for consideration.—When a Bill is reserved by a
Governor for the consideration of the President, the President shall declare
either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom:
Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may
direct the Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the
Houses of the Legislature of the State together with such a message as is
mentioned in the first proviso to article 200 and, when a Bill is so returned, the
House or Houses shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months
from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the House 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
92
or Houses with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the
President for his consideration.
Procedure in Financial Matters
202. Annual financial statement.—(1) The Governor shall in respect of
every financial year cause to be laid before the House or Houses of the
Legislature of the State a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of
the State for that year, in this Part referred to as the “annual financial
statement”.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial
statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this
Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the
State; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made
from the Consolidated Fund of the State,
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of each State—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Governor and other
expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, in the case of a State having a
Legislative Council, also of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of
the Legislative Council;
(c) debt charges for which the State is liable including interest,
sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure
relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt;
(d) expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of Judges of
any High Court;
(e) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any
court or arbitral tribunal;
(f) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution, or by the
Legislature of the State by law, to be so charged.
203. Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates.—(1) So
much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated
Fund of a State shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative Assembly, 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
93
but nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the discussion in the
Legislature of any of those estimates.
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be
submitted in the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and
the Legislative Assembly shall have power to assent, or to refuse to assent, to
any demand, or to assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount
specified therein.
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation
of the Governor.
204. Appropriation Bills.—(1) As soon as may be after the grants under
article 203 have been made by the Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to
provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of the State of all
moneys required to meet—
(a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State but
not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously
laid before the House or Houses.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the House or
either House of the Legislature of the State which will have the effect of
varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of
varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of
the State, and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment
is inadmissible under this clause shall be final.
(3) Subject to the provisions of articles 205 and 206, no money shall be
withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State except under appropriation
made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
205. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.—(1) The Governor
shall—
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the
provisions of article 204 to be expended for a particular service for the
current financial year is found to be insufficient for the purposes of that
year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for
supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new service not
contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year; or
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
94
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial
year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year,
cause to be laid before the House or the Houses of the Legislature of the State
another statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to
be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the State a demand for such excess,
as the case may be.
(2) The provisions of articles 202, 203 and 204 shall have effect in
relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law
to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of the State to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such
demand as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the
expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant and the law to be
made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of the State to meet such expenditure or grant.
206. Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the
Legislative Assembly of a State shall have power—(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated
expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of
the procedure prescribed in article 203 for the voting of such grant and
the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 204 in
relation to that expenditure;
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the
resources of the State when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite
character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details
ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current
service of any financial year,
and the Legislature of the State shall have power to authorise by law the
withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the State for the purposes
for which the said grants are made.
(2) The provisions of articles 203 and 204 shall have effect in relation to
the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under that
clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any
expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
95
for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of the State to meet such expenditure.
207. Special provisions as to financial Bills.—(1) A Bill or amendment
making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of
clause (1) of article 199 shall not be introduced or moved except on the
recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill making such provision shall not be
introduced in a Legislative Council:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for
the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of
any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any
of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of
fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for
licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the
imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local
authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be passed by a
House of the Legislature of the State unless the Governor has recommended to
that House the consideration of the Bill.
Procedure Generally
208. Rules of procedure.—(1) A House of the Legislature of a State
may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its
procedure and the conduct of its business.
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and
standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution with respect to the Legislature for the corresponding Province shall
have effect in relation to the Legislature of the State subject to such modifications
and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly, or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case may be.
(3) In a State having a Legislative Council the Governor, after
consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman of ______________________________________________ The brackets and words "(including the quorum to constitute a meeting of the House)"
ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 35 (date not notified).
This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
96
the Legislative Council, may make rules as to the procedure with respect to
communications between the two Houses.
209. Regulation by law of procedure in the Legislature of the State in
relation to financial business.—The Legislature of a State may, for the purpose
of the timely completion of financial business, regulate by law the procedure of,
and the conduct of business in, the House or Houses of the Legislature of the
State in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of
moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State, and, if and so far as any
provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any rule made by the House or
either House of the Legislature of the State under clause (1) of article 208 or with
any rule or standing order having effect in relation to the Legislature of the State
under clause (2) of that article, such provision shall prevail.
210. Language to be used in the Legislature.—(1) Notwithstanding
anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of article 348, business in
the Legislature of a State shall be transacted in the official language or
languages of the State or in Hindi or in English:
Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or Chairman of
the Legislative Council, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may
permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of the
languages aforesaid to address the House in his mother-tongue.
(2) Unless the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, this
article shall, after the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the
commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if the words “or in English”
were omitted therefrom: 1
[Provided that in relation to the 2
[Legislatures of the States of Himachal
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura] this clause shall have effect as if for
the words “fifteen years” occurring therein, the words “twenty-five years” were
substituted:] 3
[Provided further that in relation to the 4
[Legislatures of the States of 5
[Arunachal Pradesh, Goa and Mizoram]], this clause shall have effect as if for ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 (53 of 1970), s. 46 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971).
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971) s. 71, for
"Legislature of the State of Himachal Pradesh" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3. Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
4. Subs. by the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 42, for "Legislature
of the State of Mizoram" (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for
"Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram" (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
97
the words "fifteen years" occurring therein, the words "forty years" were
substituted.]
211. Restriction on discussion in the Legislature.—No discussion
shall take place in the Legislature of a State with respect to the conduct of any
Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties.
212. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the Legislature.—(1)
The validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall not be called
in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
(2) No officer or member of the Legislature of a State in whom powers
are vested by or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct
of business, or for maintaining order, in the Legislature shall be subject to the
jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.
CHAPTER IV.—LEGISLATIVE POWER OF THE GOVERNOR213. Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of
Legislature.—(1) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a
State is in session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except
when both Houses of the Legislature are in session, the Governor is satisfied
that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate
action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to
him to require:
Provided that the Governor shall not, without instructions from the
President, promulgate any such Ordinance if—(a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under this
Constitution have required the previous sanction of the President for the
introduction thereof into the Legislature; or
(b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing
the same provisions for the consideration of the President; or
(c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same
provisions would under this Constitution have been invalid unless,
having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had
received the assent of the President.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same
force and effect as an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the
Governor, but every such Ordinance—
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
98
(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State, or
where there is a Legislative Council in the State, before both the Houses,
and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the
reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the expiration of that period a
resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative Assembly and
agreed to by the Legislative Council, if any, upon the passing of the
resolution or, as the case may be, on the resolution being agreed to by
the Council; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.
Explanation.—Where the Houses of the Legislature of a State having a
Legislative Council are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the period
of six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the purposes of
this clause.
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision
which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the State
assented to by the Governor, it shall be void:
Provided that, for the purposes of the provisions of this Constitution
relating to the effect of an Act of the Legislature of a State which is repugnant
to an Act of Parliament or an existing law with respect to a matter enumerated
in the Concurrent List, an Ordinance promulgated under this article in
pursuance of instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of
the Legislature of the State which has been reserved for the consideration of the
President and assented to by him. 1
(4)* * * *
______________________________________________
1. Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3 (with
retrospective effect) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 27 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
99
CHAPTER V.—THE HIGH COURTS IN THE STATES
214. High Courts for States.—1
*** There shall be a High Court for each
State. 2
(2)* * * * 2
(3)* * * *
215. High Courts to be courts of record.—Every High Court shall be a
court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the
power to punish for contempt of itself.
216. Constitution of High Courts.—Every High Court shall consist of a
Chief Justice and such other Judges as the President may from time to time
deem it necessary to appoint. 3
* * * * *
217. Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High
Court.—(1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President
by warrant under his hand and seal 4
[on the recommendation of the National
Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A], and the
Governor of the State, and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the
Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court, 5
[shall hold office, in the
case of an additional or acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any
other case, until he attains the age of 6
[sixty-two years:]]
Provided that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
President, resign his office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the ______________________________________________
1. The bracket and figure "(1)" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Cls. (2) and (3) omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Proviso omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 11
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 6, for "after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in the case
of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High
Court" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme
Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and Another Vs.
Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 12, for "shall hold office
until he attains the age of sixty years" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
6. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4(a), for "sixty years"
(w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
100
manner provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge
of the Supreme Court;
(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by
the President to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being
transferred by the President to any other High Court within the territory
of India.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High
Court unless he is a citizen of India and—(a) has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory of
India; or
(b) has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court 1
*** or of two or more such Courts in succession.2***
2
(c)* * * * *
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause—3
[(a) in computing the period during which a person has held
judicial office in the territory of India, there shall be included any period,
after he has held any judicial office, during which the person has been an
advocate of a High Court or has held the office of a member of a tribunal
or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of
law;] 4
[(aa)] in computing the period during which a person has been an
advocate of a High Court, there shall be included any period during
which the person 5
[has held judicial office or the office of a member of a
tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special
knowledge of law] after he became an advocate;
(b) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial
office in the territory of India or been an advocate of a High Court, there
shall be included any period before the commencement of this ______________________________________________
1. The words "in any State specified in the First Schedule" omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The word "or" and sub-clause (c) were ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 36 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
4. Cl. (a) re-lettered as cl. (aa) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 36, for "has held
judicial office" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
101
Constitution during which he has held judicial office in any area which
was comprised before the fifteenth day of August, 1947, within India as
defined by the Government of India Act, 1935, or has been an advocate
of any High Court in any such area, as the case may be. 1
[(3) If any question arises as to the age of a Judge of a High Court, the
question shall be decided by the President after consultation with the Chief
Justice of India and the decision of the President shall be final.]
218. Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme Court to
High Courts.—The provisions of clauses (4) and (5) of article 124 shall apply
in relation to a High Court as they apply in relation to the Supreme Court with
the substitution of references to the High Court for references to the Supreme
Court.
219. Oath or affirmation by Judges of High Courts.—Every person
appointed to be a Judge of a High Court 2
*** shall, before he enters upon his
office, make and subscribe before the Governor of the State, or some person
appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form
set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule. 3
[220. Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge.—No
person who, after the commencement of this Constitution, has held office as a
permanent Judge of a High Court shall plead or act in any court or before any
authority in India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “High Court” does not
include a High Court for a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule as it
existed before the commencement4
of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956.]
221. Salaries, etc., of Judges.—5
[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges
of each High Court such salaries as may be determined by Parliament by law ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4(b), (with retrospective
effect).
2. The words "in a State" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,
s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. 1st November, 1956.
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 3, for clause (1)
(w.e.f. 1-4-1986).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
102
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries as are specified in
the Second Schedule.]
(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such allowances and to such rights in
respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be
determined by or under law made by Parliament and, until so determined, to
such allowances and rights as are specified in the Second Schedule:
Provided that neither the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect
to leave of absence or pension shall be varied to his disadvantage after his
appointment.
222. Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another.—(1) The
President may, 1
[on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in article 124A], transfer a Judge from one High Court
to any other High Court 2
***. 3
[(2) When a Judge has been or is so transferred, he shall, during the
period he serves, after the commencement of the Constitution (Fifteenth
Amendment) Act, 1963, as a Judge of the other High Court, be entitled to
receive in addition to his salary such compensatory allowance as may be
determined by Parliament by law and, until so determined, such compensatory
allowance as the President may by order fix.]
223. Appointment of acting Chief Justice.—When the office of Chief
Justice of a High Court is vacant or when any such Chief Justice is, by reason
of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of
the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as
the President may appoint for the purpose. 4
[224. Appointment of additional and acting Judges.—(1) If by
reason of any temporary increase in the business of a High Court or by reason ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 7, for "after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has
been struck down by the Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-onRecord Association and Another Vs. Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015,
AIR 2016 SC 117.
2. The words "within the territory of India" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
Original cl. (2) was omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,
s. 14 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 15 for art. 224
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
103
of arrears of work therein, it appears to the President that the number of the
Judges of that Court should be for the time being increased, 1
[the President
may, in consultation with the National Judicial Appointments Commission,
appoint] duly qualified persons to be additional Judges of the Court for such
period not exceeding two years as he may specify.
(2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief Justice is by
reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his
office or is appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, 1
[the President may,
in consultation with the National Judicial Appointments Commission, appoint]
a duly qualified person to act as a Judge of that Court until the permanent Judge
has resumed his duties.
 (3) No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High
Court shall hold office after attaining the age of 2
[sixty-two years].] 3
[224A. Appointment of retired Judges at sittings of High Courts.—Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, 4
[the National Judicial Appointments
Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of a High Court for
any State, may with the previous consent of the President], request any person
who has held the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other High Court to
sit and act as a Judge of the High Court for that State, and every such person so
requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as
the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and
privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that High
Court:
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such
person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that High Court unless he
consents so to do.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 8, for "the
President may appoint" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down, by
the Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association
and Another Vs. Union of India in its judgment, dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
2 Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 6, for "sixty years"
(w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 9, for "the Chief
Justice of a High Court for any State may at any time, with the previous consent of the
President" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme
Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and Another Vs. Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
104
225. Jurisdiction of existing High Courts.—Subject to the provisions
of this Constitution and to the provisions of any law of the appropriate
Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature by this
Constitution, the jurisdiction of, and the law administered in, any existing High
Court, and the respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the
administration of justice in the Court, including any power to make rules of
Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members thereof sitting
alone or in Division Courts, shall be the same as immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution: 1
[Provided that any restriction to which the exercise of original
jurisdiction by any of the High Courts with respect to any matter concerning
the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection thereof was
subject immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall no
longer apply to the exercise of such jurisdiction.] 2
[226. Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in article 32 3
***, every High Court shall have
power, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to
issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any
Government, within those territories directions, orders or writs, including 4
[writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto
and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights
conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.]
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue directions, orders or writs
to any Government, authority or person may also be exercised by any High
Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within which the cause
of action, wholly or in part, arises for the exercise of such power, ______________________________________________
1. Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 37
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and subsequently ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 29 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 38 for art. 226
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. The words, figures and letters "but subject to the provisions of article 131A and article
226A" omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 7
(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 30, for the portion
beginning with "writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo
warranto and certiorari, or any of them" and ending with "such illegality has resulted
in substantial failure of justice." (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
105
notwithstanding that the seat of such Government or authority or the residence
of such person is not within those territories. 1
[(3) Where any party against whom an interim order, whether by way of
injunction or stay or in any other manner, is made on, or in any proceedings
relating to, a petition under clause (1), without—(a) furnishing to such party copies of such petition and all documents
in support of the plea for such interim order; and
(b) giving such party an opportunity of being heard,
makes an application to the High Court for the vacation of such order and
furnishes a copy of such application to the party in whose favour such order has
been made or the counsel of such party, the High Court shall dispose of the
application within a period of two weeks from the date on which it is received or
from the date on which the copy of such application is so furnished, whichever is
later, or where the High Court is closed on the last day of that period, before the
expiry of the next day afterwards on which the High Court is open; and if the
application is not so disposed of, the interim order shall, on the expiry of that
period, or, as the case may be, the expiry of the said next day, stand vacated.] 2
[(4) The power conferred on a High Court by this article shall not be in
derogation of the power conferred on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32.] 3
[226A. Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered in
proceedings under article 226.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 8 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
227. Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court.—4
[(1) Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts and tribunals
throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.30, for cls. (3), (4),
(5) and (6) (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2. Cl. (7) renumbered as cl. (4) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 30 (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 39 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 40, for cl. (1)
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 31, for cl. (1) (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
106
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the
High Court may—
(a) call for returns from such courts;
(b) make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating
the practice and proceedings of such courts; and
(c) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept
by the officers of any such courts.
(3) The High Court may also settle tables of fees to be allowed to the
sheriff and all clerks and officers of such courts and to attorneys, advocates and
pleaders practising therein:
Provided that any rules made, forms prescribed or tables settled under
clause (2) or clause (3) shall not be inconsistent with the provision of any law
for the time being in force, and shall require the previous approval of the
Governor.
(4) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to confer on a High Court
powers of superintendence over any court or tribunal constituted by or under
any law relating to the Armed Forces. 1
(5)* * * *
228. Transfer of certain cases to High Court.—If the High Court is
satisfied that a case pending in a court subordinate to it involves a substantial
question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution the determination of
which is necessary for the disposal of the case, 2
[it shall withdraw the case and
3
*** may—]
(a) either dispose of the case itself, or
(b) determine the said question of law and return the case to the
court from which the case has been so withdrawn together with a copy of
its judgment on such question, and the said court shall on receipt thereof
proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment. ______________________________________________
1. Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 40
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 31 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 41, for "it shall
withdraw the case and may—" (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. The words, figures and letter, "subject to the provisions of article 131A," omitted by
the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 9 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
107
1
[228A. Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to
constitutional validity of State laws.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Fortythird Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 10 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
229. Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts.—(1)
Appointments of officers and servants of a High Court shall be made by the Chief
Justice of the Court or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he may direct:
Provided that the Governor of the State 2
*** may by rule require that in
such cases as may be specified in the rule no person not already attached to the
Court shall be appointed to any office connected with the Court save after
consultation with the State Public Service Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of the
State, the conditions of service of officers and servants of a High Court shall be
such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of the Court or by
some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice to
make rules for the purpose:
Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far as they relate
to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, require the approval of the Governor
of the State 2
***.
(3) The administrative expenses of a High Court, including all salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of
the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State, and any
fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of that Fund. 3
[230. Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union
territories.—(1) Parliament may by law extend the jurisdiction of a High Court
to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.
(2) Where the High Court of a State exercises jurisdiction in relation to a
Union territory,—
(a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as empowering the
Legislature of the State to increase, restrict or abolish that jurisdiction; and
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 42 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. The words "in which the High Court has its principal seat" omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for arts. 230, 231 and 232 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
108
any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts in that territory, be
construed as a reference to the President.
231. Establishment of a common High Court for two or more
States.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions of
this Chapter, Parliament may by law establish a common High Court for two or
more States or for two or more States and a Union territory.
(2) In relation to any such High Court,— 1
(a)* * * * *
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to
any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts, be construed as a
reference to the Governor of the State in which the subordinate courts
are situate; and
(c) the references in articles 219 and 229 to the State shall be
construed as a reference to the State in which the High Court has its
principal seat:
Provided that if such principal seat is in a Union territory, the references
in articles 219 and 229 to the Governor, Public Service Commission,
Legislature and Consolidated Fund of the State shall be construed respectively
as references to the President, Union Public Service Commission, Parliament
and Consolidated Fund of India.]
[232. Interpretation.—Articles 230, 231 and 232 subs. by articles 230
and 231 by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 16
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956)].
CHAPTER VI.—SUBORDINATE COURTS
233. Appointment of district judges.—(1) Appointments of persons to ______________________________________________
1. Sub-clause (a) was omitted by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014,
s. 10 (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme Court
vide its order the 16-10-2015 in the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association
and Another Vs. Union of India reported AIR 2016 SC 117. Before amendment,
sub-clause (a) was as under:—
"(a) the reference in article 217 to the Governor of the State shall be construed as
reference to the Governors of all the States in relation to which the High Court
exercises jurisdiction".
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
109
be, and the posting and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made
by the Governor of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising
jurisdiction in relation to such State.
(2) A person not already in the service of the Union or of the State shall
only be eligible to be appointed a district judge if he has been for not less than
seven years an advocate or a pleader and is recommended by the High Court
for appointment. 1
[233A. Validation of appointments of, and judgments, etc.,
delivered by, certain district judges.—Notwithstanding any judgment,
decree or order of any court,—
(a) (i) no appointment of any person already in the judicial service
of a State or of any person who has been for not less than seven years an
advocate or a pleader, to be a district judge in that State, and
(ii) no posting, promotion or transfer of any such person as a
district judge, made at any time before the commencement of the
Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, otherwise than in
accordance with the provisions of article 233 or article 235 shall be
deemed to be illegal or void or ever to have become illegal or void by
reason only of the fact that such appointment, posting, promotion or
transfer was not made in accordance with the said provisions;
(b) no jurisdiction exercised, no judgment, decree, sentence or order
passed or made, and no other act or proceeding done or taken, before the
commencement of the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966
by, or before, any person appointed, posted, promoted or transferred as a
district judge in any State otherwise than in accordance with the
provisions of article 233 or article 235 shall be deemed to be illegal or
invalid or ever to have become illegal or invalid by reason only of the
fact that such appointment, posting, promotion or transfer was not made
in accordance with the said provisions.]
234. Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial
service.—Appointments of persons other than district judges to the judicial service
of a State shall be made by the Governor of the State in accordance with rules made
by him in that behalf after consultation with the State Public Service Commission
and with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-12-1966).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VI.—The States)
110
235. Control over subordinate courts.—The control over district
courts and courts subordinate thereto including the posting and promotion of,
and the grant of leave to, persons belonging to the judicial service of a State
and holding any post inferior to the post of district judge shall be vested in the
High Court, but nothing in this article shall be construed as taking away from
any such person any right of appeal which he may have under the law
regulating the conditions of his service or as authorising the High Court to deal
with him otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of his service
prescribed under such law.
236. Interpretation.—In this Chapter—(a) the expression “district judge” includes judge of a city civil court,
additional district judge, joint district judge, assistant district judge, chief
judge of a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate, additional
chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge, additional sessions judge
and assistant sessions Judge;
(b) the expression “judicial service” means a service consisting
exclusively of persons intended to fill the post of district judge and other
civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district judge.
237. Application of the provisions of this Chapter to certain class or
classes of magistrates.—The Governor may by public notification direct that
the foregoing provisions of this Chapter and any rules made thereunder shall
with effect from such date as may be fixed by him in that behalf apply in
relation to any class or classes of magistrates in the State as they apply in
relation to persons appointed to the judicial service of the State subject to such
exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the notification.
111
PART VII
[The States in Part B of the First Schedule].
______________________________________________ Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and
Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956)
112
PART VIII 1
[THE UNION TERRITORIES] 2
[239. Administration of Union territories.—(1) Save as otherwise
provided by Parliament by law, every Union territory shall be administered by
the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through an administrator to
be appointed by him with such designation as he may specify.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Part VI, the President may
appoint the Governor of a State as the administrator of an adjoining Union
territory, and where a Governor is so appointed, he shall exercise his functions
as such administrator independently of his Council of Ministers.] 3
*[239A. Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or
both for certain Union territories.—(1) Parliament may by law create 4
[for
the Union territory of 5
[Puducherry]]—
(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly elected, to
function as a Legislature for the Union territory, or
(b) a Council of Ministers,
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may be
specified in the law.
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall not be deemed to be
an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect
of amending this Constitution.] ______________________________________________ 1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 17, for the heading
"THE STATES IN PART C OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for art. 239 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 4 (w.e.f. 28-12-1962).
4. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987) s. 63, for
"for any of the Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry"
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
5. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
* Article 239A has been made applicable to Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir by
the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019) S.13
(w.e.f. 31-10-2019)
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories)
113
1
[239AA. Special provisions with respect to Delhi.—(1) As from the
date of commencement of the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act,
1991, the Union territory of Delhi shall be called the National Capital Territory
of Delhi (hereafter in this Part referred to as the National Capital Territory) and
the administrator thereof appointed under article 239 shall be designated as the
Lieutenant Governor.
(2)(a) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for the National Capital
Territory and the seats in such Assembly shall be filled by members chosen by
direct election from territorial constituencies in the National Capital Territory.
(b) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the number of
seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, the division of the National Capital
Territory into territorial constituencies (including the basis for such division)
and all other matters relating to the functioning of the Legislative Assembly
shall be regulated by law made by Parliament. 2
[(ba) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of
the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
(bb) As nearly as may be, one-third of the seats reserved for the
Scheduled Castes in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory
of Delhi shall be reserved for women.
(bc) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats to be
filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital
Territory of Delhi (including the numbers of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes) shall be reserved for women in such
manner as Parliament may by law determine.]
(c) The provisions of articles 324 to 327 and 329 shall apply in relation
to the National Capital Territory, the Legislative Assembly of the National
Capital Territory and the members thereof as they apply, in relation to a State,
the Legislative Assembly of a State and the members thereof respectively; and
any reference in articles 326 and 329 to “appropriate Legislature” shall be
deemed to be a reference to Parliament. ______________________________________________
1. Arts 239AA and 239 AB ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991,
s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-2-1992).
2. ins. by the Constitution (One-hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023, s. 2 (date yet
to be notified).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories)
114
(3) (a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative
Assembly shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part of the
National Capital Territory with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the
State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any such matter is applicable to
Union territories except matters with respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State
List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the said
Entries 1, 2 and 18.
(b) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from the powers of
Parliament under this Constitution to make laws with respect to any matter for
a Union territory or any part thereof.
(c) If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly with
respect to any matter is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament
with respect to that matter, whether passed before or after the law made by the
Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, other than a law made by the
Legislative Assembly, then, in either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as
the case may be, such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made by the
Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void:
Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative Assembly has
been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent,
such law shall prevail in the National Capital Territory:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall prevent Parliament
from enacting at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a
law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the
Legislative Assembly.
(4) There shall be a Council of Ministers consisting of not more than ten
percent. of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly, with the
Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor in the
exercise of his functions in relation to matters with respect to which the
Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, except in so far as he is, by or
under any law, required to act in his discretion:
Provided that in the case of difference of opinion between the Lieutenant
Governor and his Ministers on any matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer
it to the President for decision and act according to the decision given thereon
by the President and pending such decision it shall be competent for the
Lieutenant Governor in any case where the matter, in his opinion, is so urgent
that it is necessary for him to take immediate action, to take such action or to
give such direction in the matter as he deems necessary.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories)
115
(5) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the President and other
Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Chief
Minister and the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the
President.
(6) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the
Legislative Assembly. 1
[(7) (a)] Parliament may, by law, make provisions for giving effect to,
or supplementing the provisions contained in the foregoing clauses and for all
matters incidental or consequential thereto. 2
[(b) Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not be deemed
to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect
of amending, this Constitution.]
 (8) The provisions of article 239B shall, so far as may be, apply in
relation to the National Capital Territory, the Lieutenant Governor and the
Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relation to the Union territory of 3
[Puducherry], the administrator and its Legislature, respectively; and any
reference in that article to “clause (1) of article 239A” shall be deemed to be a
reference to this article or article 239AB, as the case may be.
239AB. Provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery.—If
the President, on receipt of a report from the Lieutenant Governor or otherwise,
is satisfied—
(a) that a situation has arisen in which the administration of the
National Capital Territory cannot be carried on in accordance with the
provisions of article 239AA or of any law made in pursuance of that
article; or
(b) that for the proper administration of the National Capital
Territory it is necessary or expedient so to do,
the President may by order suspend the operation of any provision of article
239AA or of all or any of the provisions of any law made in pursuance of that ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3, for "(7)"
(w.e.f. 21-12-1991).
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 21-12-1991).
3. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories)
116
article for such period and subject to such conditions as may be specified in
such law and make such incidental and consequential provisions as may appear
to him to be necessary or expedient for administering the National Capital
Territory in accordance with the provisions of article 239 and article 239AA.] 1
[239B. Power of administrator to promulgate Ordinances during
recess of Legislature.—(1) If at any time, except when the Legislature of 2
[the
Union territory of 3
[Puducherry]] is in session, the administrator thereof is
satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take
immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances
appear to him to require:
Provided that no such Ordinance shall be promulgated by the
administrator except after obtaining instructions from the President in that
behalf:
Provided further that whenever the said Legislature is dissolved, or its
functioning remains suspended on account of any action taken under any such
law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the administrator shall not
promulgate any Ordinance during the period of such dissolution or suspension.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article in pursuance of
instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature
of the Union territory which has been duly enacted after complying with the
provisions in that behalf contained in any such law as is referred to in clause (1)
of article 239A, but every such Ordinance—(a) shall be laid before the Legislature of the Union territory and
shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly
of the Legislature or if, before the expiration of that period, a resolution
disapproving it is passed by the Legislature, upon the passing of the
resolution; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the administrator after
obtaining instructions from the President in that behalf.
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision
which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the Union
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30-12-1971).
2. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987) s. 63, for "a Union
territory referred to in clause (1) article 239A" (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
3. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories)
117
territory made after complying with the provisions in that behalf contained in
any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, it shall be void.] 1
(4)* * * * 2
[240. Power of President to make regulations for certain Union
territories.—(1) The President may make regulations for the peace, progress
and good government of the Union territory of—
 (a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; 3
[(b) Lakshadweep;] 4
[(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu;] 5
[(d) **** ;] 6
[(e) 7
[Puducherry ];] 8
(f) * * * 9
(g) * * *
10[Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function
as a Legislature for the Union territory of 7
[Puducherry], the President shall not
make any regulation for the peace, progress and good government of that
Union territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of the
Legislature:] ______________________________________________
1. Clause (4) ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 4 (with
retrospective effect). This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 32 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 17, for art. 240 (w.e.f. 1-11-
1956).
3. Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973
(34 of 1973), s. 4, for entry (b) (w.e.f. 1-11-1973).
4. Subs. by the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (Merger of Union territories) Act,
2019 (44 of 2019) s. 4(i) (w.e.f. 26-1-2020) for entry (c) which was ins. by the Constitution
(Tenth Amendment) Act, 1961, s.3 (w.e.f. 11-8-1961).
5. Omitted by the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (Merger of Union territories)
Act, 2019 (44 of 2019) s. 4(ii) (w.e.f. 26-1-2020).
6. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 5 (w.e.f. 16-8-1962).
7. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4 for
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
8. The entry (f) relating to Mizoram omitted by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986
(34 of 1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
9. The entry (g) relating to Arunachal Pradesh omitted by the State of Arunachal Pradesh
Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 42 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
10. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 5 (w.e.f. 28-12-1962).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories)
118
1
[Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature
for the Union territory of 2
[Puducherry] is dissolved, or the functioning of that
body as such Legislature remains suspended on account of any action taken
under any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the President
may, during the period of such dissolution or suspension, make regulations for
the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory.]
(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made by
Parliament or 3
[any other law], which is for the time being applicable to the
Union territory and, when promulgated by the President, shall have the same
force and effect as an Act of Parliament which applies to that territory.]
241. High Courts for Union territories.—(1) Parliament may by law
constitute a High Court for a 4
[Union territory] or declare any court in any 5
[such territory] to be a High Court for all or any of the purposes of this
Constitution.
(2) The provisions of Chapter V of Part VI shall apply in relation to
every High Court referred to in clause (1) as they apply in relation to a High
Court referred to in article 214 subject to such modifications or exceptions as
Parliament may by law provide. 6
[(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the provisions
of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred
on that Legislature by or under this Constitution, every High Court exercising
jurisdiction immediately before the commencement of the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, in relation to any Union territory shall
continue to exercise such jurisdiction in relation to that territory after such
commencement.
(4) Nothing in this article derogates from the power of Parliament to
extend or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court for a State to, or from, any
Union territory or part thereof.]
242. [Coorg.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956). ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15-2-1972).
2. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4, for "any existing
law" (w.e.f. 15-2-1972).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for "State
specified in Part C of the First Schedule" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
5. Subs. by s. 29. and Sch., ibid., for "such State" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
6. Subs. by s. 29, and Sch., ibid., for cls. (3) and (4) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
119
1
[PART IX
THE PANCHAYATS
243. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—(a) “district” means a district in a State;
(b) “Gram Sabha” means a body consisting of persons registered in
the electoral rolls relating to a village comprised within the area of
Panchayat at the village level;
(c) “intermediate level” means a level between the village and
district levels specified by the Governor of a State by public notification
to be the intermediate level for the purposes of this Part;
(d) “Panchayat” means an institution (by whatever name called) of
self-government constituted under article 243B, for the rural areas;
(e) “Panchayat area” means the territorial area of a Panchayat;
(f) “Population” means the population as ascertained at the last
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published;
(g) “village” means a village specified by the Governor by public
notification to be a village for the purposes of this Part and includes a
group of villages so specified.
243A. Gram Sabha.—A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and
perform such functions at the village level as the Legislature of a State may, by
law, provide.
243B. Constitution of Panchayats.—(1) There shall be constituted in
every State, Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels in
accordance with the provisions of this Part.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), Panchayats at the intermediate
level may not be constituted in a State having a population not exceeding
twenty lakhs.
243C. Composition of Panchayats.—(1) Subject to the provisions of
this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect
to the composition of Panchayats: ______________________________________________
1. Original Part IX relating to "The territories in Part D of the First Schedule and other
territories not specified in that Schedule" was omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956) and subsequently ins. by the
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
120
Provided that the ratio between the population of the territorial area of a
Panchayat at any level and the number of seats in such Panchayat to be filled
by election shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.
(2) All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by persons chosen by
direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area and, for this
purpose, each Panchayat area shall be divided into territorial constituencies in
such manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the
number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout
the Panchayat area.
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
representation—
(a) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the village level, in the
Panchayats at the intermediate level or, in the case of a State not having
Panchayats at the intermediate level, in the Panchayats at the district
level;
(b) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the intermediate level, in
the Panchayats at the district level;
(c) of the members of the House of the People and the members of
the Legislative Assembly of the State representing constituencies which
comprise wholly or partly a Panchayat area at a level other than the
village level, in such Panchayat;
(d) of the members of the Council of States and the members of the
Legislative Council of the State, where they are registered as electors
within—
(i) a Panchayat area at the intermediate level, in Panchayat at the
intermediate level;
(ii) a Panchayat area at the district level, in Panchayat at the
district level.
(4) The Chairperson of a Panchayat and other members of a Panchayat
whether or not chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the
Panchayat area shall have the right to vote in the meetings of the Panchayats.
(5) The Chairperson of—
(a) a Panchayat at the village level shall be elected in such manner as
the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide; and
(b) a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district level shall be
elected by, and from amongst, the elected members thereof.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
121
243D. Reservation of seats.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for—(a) the Scheduled Castes; and
(b) the Scheduled Tribes,
in every Panchayat and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as
may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct
election in that Panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes in that
Panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to the
total population of that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different constituencies in a Panchayat.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as
the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the
total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat shall be
reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Panchayat.
(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or
any other level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in
any State shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total
number of such offices in the Panchayats at each level as the population of the
Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to
the total population of the State:
Provided further that not less than one-third of the total number of offices
of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women:
Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause shall
be allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of
offices of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for women) under clause (4)
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making
any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in
the Panchayats at any level in favour of backward class of citizens.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
122
243E. Duration of Panchayats, etc.—(1) Every Panchayat, unless
sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue for
five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer.
 (2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the
effect of causing dissolution of a Panchayat at any level, which is functioning
immediately before such amendment, till the expiration of its duration specified
in clause (1).
(3) An election to constitute a Panchayat shall be completed—(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1);
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its
dissolution:
 Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved
Panchayat would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be
necessary to hold any election under this clause for constituting the Panchayat
for such period.
(4) A Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of a Panchayat before
the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period
for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued under clause (1) had it
not been so dissolved.
243F. Disqualifications for membership.— (1) A person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of a Panchayat—(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in
force for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State
concerned:
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is
less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of twentyone years;
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the
Legislature of the State.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Panchayat has
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the
question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner
as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
123
243G. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by
law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be
necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and
such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and
responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such
conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;
 (b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and
social justice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to
the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
243H. Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats.—The Legislature of a State may, by law,— (a) authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes,
duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and subject to
such limits;
(b) assign to a Panchayat such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and
collected by the State Government for such purposes and subject to such
conditions and limits;
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the
Consolidated Fund of the State; and
 (d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys
received, respectively, by or on behalf of the Panchayats and also for the
withdrawal of such moneys therefrom,
as may be specified in the law.
243I. Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial
position.—(1) The Governor of a State shall, as soon as may be within one
year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment)
Act, 1992, and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, constitute a
Finance Commission to review the financial position of the Panchayats and to
make recommendations to the Governor as to—(a) the principles which should govern—(i) the distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the
net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the
State, which may be divided between them under this Part and the
allocation between the Panchayats at all levels of their respective
shares of such proceeds;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
124
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which
may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Panchayats;
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated
Fund of the State;
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the
Panchayats;
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the
Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Panchayats.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the composition
of the Commission, the qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment
as members thereof and the manner in which they shall be selected.
(3) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such
powers in the performance of their functions as the Legislature of the State
may, by law, confer on them.
(4) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the
Commission under this article together with an explanatory memorandum as to
the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
243J. Audit of accounts of Panchayats.—The Legislature of a State
may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by
the Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.
243K. Elections to the Panchayats.—(1) The superintendence,
direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct
of, all elections to the Panchayats shall be vested in a State Election
Commission consisting of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by
the Governor.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of a
State, the conditions of service and tenure of office of the State Election
Commissioner shall be such as the Governor may by rule determine:
Provided that the State Election Commissioner shall not be removed
from his office except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of a
High Court and the conditions of service of the State Election Commissioner
shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
125
(3) The Governor of a State shall, when so requested by the State
Election Commission, make available to the State Election Commission such
staff as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions conferred on the
State Election Commission by clause (1).
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a
State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in
connection with, elections to the Panchayats.
243L. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part
shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were
references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article
239 and references to the Legislature or the legislative Assembly of a State
were references, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly,
to that Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the
provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject
to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification.
243M. Part not to apply to certain areas.—(1) Nothing in this Part
shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas
referred to in clause (2), of article 244.
(2) Nothing in this Part shall apply to—(a) the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram;
(b) the hill areas in the State of Manipur for which District Councils
exist under any law for the time being in force.
(3) Nothing in this Part—
(a) relating to Panchayats at the district level shall apply to the hill
areas of the District of Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal for which
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists under any law for the time being
in force;
(b) shall be construed to affect the functions and powers of the
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council constituted under such law.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
126
1
[(3A) Nothing in article 243D, relating to reservation of seats for the
Scheduled Castes, shall apply to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.]
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—(a) the Legislature of a State referred to in sub-clause (a) of
clause (2) may, by law, extend this Part to that State, except the areas, if
any, referred to in clause (1), if the Legislative Assembly of that State
passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of
that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members
of that House present and voting;
(b) Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of this Part to the
Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1) subject to
such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such law, and
no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for
the purposes of article 368.
243N. Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats.—Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law relating to
Panchayats in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent with
the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or
repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the
expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier:
Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediately before such
commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner
dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of
that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House
of the Legislature of that State.
243O. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or
purporting to be made under article 243K, shall not be called in question
in any court;
(b) no election to any Panchayat shall be called in question except by
an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is
provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature of a State. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-9-2000).
127
1
[PART IXA
THE MUNICIPALITIES
243P. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “Committee” means a Committee constituted under article 243S;
(b) “district” means a district in a State;
(c) “Metropolitan area” means an area having a population of ten
lakhs or more, comprised in one or more districts and consisting of two
or more Municipalities or Panchayats or other contiguous areas,
specified by the Governor by public notification to be a Metropolitan
area for the purposes of this Part;
(d) “Municipal area” means the territorial area of a Municipality as is
notified by the Governor;
(e) “Municipality” means an institution of self-government
constituted under article 243Q;
(f) “Panchayat” means a Panchayat constituted under article 243B;
(g) “population” means the population as ascertained at the last
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.
243Q. Constitution of Municipalities.—(1) There shall be constituted
in every State,—
(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called) for a transitional
area, that is to say, an area in transition from a rural area to an urban
area;
(b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area,
in accordance with the provisions of this Part: ______________________________________________
1. Part IXA ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2
(w.e.f. 1-6-1993).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
128
Provided that a Municipality under this clause may not be constituted in
such urban area or part thereof as the Governor may, having regard to the size
of the area and the municipal services being provided or proposed to be
provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as he
may deem fit, by public notification, specify to be an industrial township.
(2) In this article, “a transitional area”, “a smaller urban area” or “a
larger urban area” means such area as the Governor may, having regard to the
population of the area, the density of the population therein, the revenue
generated for local administration, the percentage of employment in nonagricultural activities, the economic importance or such other factors as he may
deem fit, specify by public notification for the purposes of this Part.
243R. Composition of Municipalities.—(1) Save as provided in
clause (2), all the seats in a Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by
direct election from the territorial constituencies in the Municipal area and for
this purpose each Municipal area shall be divided into territorial constituencies
to be known as wards.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide—(a) for the representation in a Municipality of—(i) persons having special knowledge or experience in
Municipal administration;
(ii) the members of the House of the People and the members
of the Legislative Assembly of the State representing
constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the Municipal
area;
(iii) the members of the Council of States and the members of
the Legislative Council of the State registered as electors within
the Municipal area;
(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under
clause (5) of article 243S:
Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph (i) shall not
have the right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality;
(b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
129
243S. Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc.—(1)
There shall be constituted Wards Committees, consisting of one or more wards,
within the territorial area of a Municipality having a population of three lakhs or more. (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect
to—
(a) the composition and the territorial area of a Wards Committee;
(b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee shall be
filled.
(3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward within the territorial
area of the Wards Committee shall be a member of that Committee.
(4) Where a Wards Committee consists of—(a) one ward, the member representing that ward in the Municipality; or (b) two or more wards, one of the members representing such wards
in the Municipality elected by the members of the Wards Committee,
shall be the Chairperson of that Committee.
(5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the Legislature of a
State from making any provision for the constitution of Committees in addition
to the Wards Committees.
243T. Reservation of seats.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality and the
number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same
proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that
Municipality as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the Municipal area or
of the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipal area bears to the total population of
that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies
in a Municipality.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as
the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes. 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
130
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the
total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall
be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Municipality.
(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be reserved
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as
the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of
offices of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for women) under clause (4)
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from
making any provision for reservation of seats in any Municipality or offices of
Chairpersons in the Municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens.
243U. Duration of Municipalities, etc.—(1) Every Municipality, unless
sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue for
five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer:
Provided that a Municipality shall be given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard before its dissolution.
(2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the
effect of causing dissolution of a Municipality at any level, which is
functioning immediately before such amendment, till the expiration of its
duration specified in clause (1).
(3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be completed,—(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1);
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its
dissolution:
Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved
Municipality would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be
necessary to hold any election under this clause for constituting the
Municipality for such period.
(4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a Municipality
before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the
period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued under
clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
131
243V. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of a Municipality—
(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force
for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned:
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is
less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of
twenty-one years;
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the
Legislature of the State.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Municipality has
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the
question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner
as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
243W. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities,
etc.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State
may, by law, endow—
(a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be
necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government
and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and
responsibilities upon Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may
be specified therein, with respect to—(i) the preparation of plans for economic development and social
justice;
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of
schemes as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to
the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be
necessary to enable them to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon
them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth
Schedule.
243X. Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities.—The Legislature of a State may, by law,—(a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such
taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and
subject to such limits;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
132
(b) assign to a Municipality such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied
and collected by the State Government for such purposes and subject to
such conditions and limits;
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from
the Consolidated Fund of the State; and
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys
received, respectively, by or on behalf of the Municipalities and also for
the withdrawal of such moneys therefrom,
as may be specified in the law.
243Y. Finance Commission.—(1) The Finance Commission constituted
under article 243I shall also review the financial position of the Municipalities
and make recommendations to the Governor as to—(a) the principles which should govern—(i) the distribution between the State and the Municipalities of
the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the
State, which may be divided between them under this Part and the
allocation between the Municipalities at all levels of their respective
shares of such proceeds;
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which
may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Municipalities;
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the
Consolidated Fund of the State;
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the
Municipalities;
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the
Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Municipalities.
(2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the
Commission under this article together with an explanatory memorandum as to
the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
243Z. Audit of accounts of Municipalities.—The Legislature of a State
may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by
the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
133
243ZA. Elections to the Municipalities.—(1) The superintendence,
direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct
of, all elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in the State Election
Commission referred to in article 243K.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a
State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in
connection with, elections to the Municipalities.
243ZB. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part
shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were
references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under
article 239 and references to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a
State were references in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative
Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the
provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject
to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification.
243ZC. Part not to apply to certain areas.—(1) Nothing in this Part
shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas
referred to in clause (2) of article 244.
(2) Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect the functions and
powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council constituted under any law for the
time being in force for the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling in the State of
West Bengal.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may, by
law, extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal
areas referred to in clause (1) subject to such exceptions and modifications as
may be specified in such law, and no such law shall be deemed to be an
amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.
243ZD. Committee for district planning.—(1) There shall be
constituted in every State at the district level a District Planning Committee to
consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the
district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect
to—
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
134
(a) the composition of the District Planning Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be
filled:
Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total number of
members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the
elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the
Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio between the
population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district;
(c) the functions relating to district planning which may be
assigned to such Committees;
(d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees
shall be chosen.
(3) Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft
development plan,—
 (a) have regard to—
(i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats and
the Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and
other physical and natural resources, the integrated development
of infrastructure and environmental conservation;
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether
financial or otherwise;
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor
may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward
the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government
of the State.
243ZE. Committee for Metropolitan planning.—(1) There shall be
constituted in every Metropolitan area a Metropolitan Planning Committee to
prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to—(a) the composition of the Metropolitan Planning Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled:
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
135
Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of such
Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members
of the Municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the
Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio between the population of
the Municipalities and of the Panchayats in that area;
(c) the representation in such Committees of the Government of
India and the Government of the State and of such organisations and
institutions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the functions
assigned to such Committees;
(d) the functions relating to planning and coordination for the
Metropolitan area which may be assigned to such Committees;
(e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees
shall be chosen.
(3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft
development plan,—
(a) have regard to—
(i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the
Panchayats in the Metropolitan area;
(ii) matters of common interest between the Municipalities
and the Panchayats, including coordinated spatial planning of the
area, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources,
the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental
conservation;
(iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the
Government of India and the Government of the State;
(iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made
in the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Government of India
and of the Government of the State and other available resources
whether financial or otherwise;
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor
may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall
forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the
Government of the State. 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
136
243ZF. Continuance of existing laws and Municipalities.—Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law relating to
Municipalities in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent
with the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or
repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the
expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier:
Provided that all the Municipalities existing immediately before such
commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner
dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of
that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House
of the Legislature of that State.
243ZG. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or
purporting to be made under article 243ZA shall not be called in
question in any court;
(b) no election to any Municipality shall be called in question
except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such
manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature
of a State.]
137
1
[PART IXB
THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
243ZH. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “authorised person” means a person referred to as such in article
243ZQ;
(b) “board” means the board of directors or the governing body of a
co-operative society, by whatever name called, to which the direction
and control of the management of the affairs of a society is entrusted to;
(c) “co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be
registered under any law relating to co-operative societies for the time
being in force in any State;
(d) “multi-State co-operative society” means a society with objects
not confined to one State and registered or deemed to be registered under
any law for the time being in force relating to such co-operatives;
(e) “office bearer” means a President, Vice-President, Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, Secretary or Treasurer, of a co-operative society and
includes any other person to be elected by the board of any co-operative
society;
(f) “Registrar” means the Central Registrar appointed by the Central
Government in relation to the multi-State co-operative societies and the
Registrar for co-operative societies appointed by the State Government
under the law made by the Legislature of a State in relation to
co-operative societies;
(g) “State Act” means any law made by the Legislature of a State;
(h) “State level co-operative society” means a co-operative society
having its area of operation extending to the whole of a State and defined
as such in any law made by the Legislature of a State.
243ZI. Incorporation of co-operative societies.—Subject to the
provisions of this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions
with respect to the incorporation, regulation and winding up of co-operative
societies based on the principles of voluntary formation, democratic
member-control, member-economic participation and autonomous functioning. ______________________________________________
1. Part IXB ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 4
(w.e.f. 15-2-2012).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXB.—Co-operative Societies)
138
243ZJ. Number and term of members of board and its office
bearers.—(1) The board shall consist of such number of directors as may be
provided by the Legislature of a State, by law:
Provided that the maximum number of directors of a co-operative
society shall not exceed twenty-one:
Provided further that the Legislature of a State shall, by law, provide for
the reservation of one seat for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes
and two seats for women on board of every co-operative society consisting of
individuals as members and having members from such class of category of
persons.
(2) The term of office of elected members of the board and its office
bearers shall be five years from the date of election and the term of office
bearers shall be conterminous with the term of the board:
Provided that the board may fill a casual vacancy on the board by
nomination out of the same class of members in respect of which the casual
vacancy has arisen, if the term of office of the board is less than half of its
original term.
(3) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, make provisions for
co-option of persons to be members of the board having experience in the field
of banking, management, finance or specialisation in any other field relating to
the objects and activities undertaken by the co-operative society, as members of
the board of such society:
Provided that the number of such co-opted members shall not exceed
two in addition to twenty-one directors specified in the first proviso to
clause (1):
Provided further that such co-opted members shall not have the right to
vote in any election of the co-operative society in their capacity as such
member or to be eligible to be elected as office bearers of the board:
Provided also that the functional directors of a co-operative society shall
also be the members of the board and such members shall be excluded for the
purpose of counting the total number of directors specified in the first proviso
to clause (1). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXB.—Co-operative Societies)
139
243ZK. Election of members of board.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in any law made by the Legislature of a State, the election of a board
shall be conducted before the expiry of the term of the board so as to ensure
that the newly elected members of the board assume office immediately on the
expiry of the office of members of the outgoing board.
(2) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of
electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co-operative society
shall vest in such an authority or body, as may be provided by the Legislature
of a State, by law:
Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
procedure and guidelines for the conduct of such elections.
243ZL. Supersession and suspension of board and interim
management.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, no board shall be superseded or kept under suspension for a
period exceeding six months:
Provided that the board may be superseded or kept under suspension in a case—
(i) of its persistent default; or
(ii) of negligence in the performance of its duties; or
(iii) the board has committed any act prejudicial to the interests of
the co-operative society or its members; or
(iv) there is stalemate in the constitution or functions of the board; or (v) the authority or body as provided by the Legislature of a State,
by law, under clause (2) of article 243ZK, has failed to conduct
elections in accordance with the provisions of the State Act:
Provided further that the board of any such co-operative society shall not
be superseded or kept under suspension where there is no Government
shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any guarantee by the
Government:
Provided also that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the
business of banking, the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
(10 of 1949) shall also apply: 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXB.—Co-operative Societies)
140
Provided also that in case of a co-operative society, other than a
multi-State co-operative society, carrying on the business of banking, the
provisions of this clause shall have the effect as if for the words “six months”,
the words “one year” had been substituted.
(2) In case of supersession of a board, the administrator appointed to
manage the affairs of such co-operative society shall arrange for conduct of
elections within the period specified in clause (1) and handover the
management to the elected board.
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for the
conditions of service of the administrator.
243ZM. Audit of accounts of co-operative societies.—(1) The
Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the
maintenance of accounts by the co-operative societies and the auditing of such
accounts at least once in each financial year.
(2) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, lay down the minimum
qualifications and experience of auditors and auditing firms that shall be
eligible for auditing accounts of the co-operative societies.
(3) Every co-operative society shall cause to be audited by an auditor or
auditing firms referred to in clause (2) appointed by the general body of the
co-operative society:
Provided that such auditors or auditing firms shall be appointed from a
panel approved by a State Government or an authority authorised by the State
Government in this behalf.
(4) The accounts of every co-operative society shall be audited within
six months of the close of the financial year to which such accounts relate.
(5) The audit report of the accounts of an apex co-operative society, as
may be defined by the State Act, shall be laid before the State Legislature in the
manner, as may be provided by the State Legislature, by law.
243ZN. Convening of general body meetings.—The Legislature of a
State may, by law, make provisions that the annual general body meeting of
every co-operative society shall be convened within a period of six months of
close of the financial year to transact the business as may be provided in such
law.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXB.—Co-operative Societies)
141
243ZO. Right of a member to get information.—(1) The Legislature
of a State may, by law, provide for access to every member of a co-operative
society to the books, information and accounts of the co-operative society kept
in regular transaction of its business with such member.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions to ensure
the participation of members in the management of the co-operative society
providing minimum requirement of attending meetings by the members and
utilising the minimum level of services as may be provided in such law.
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for co-operative
education and training for its members.
243ZP. Returns.—Every co-operative society shall file returns, within
six months of the close of every financial year, to the authority designated by
the State Government including the following matters, namely:—(a) annual report of its activities;
(b) its audited statement of accounts;
(c) plan for surplus disposal as approved by the general body of the
co-operative society;
(d) list of amendments to the bye-laws of the co-operative society, if
any;
(e) declaration regarding date of holding of its general body meeting
and conduct of elections when due; and
(f) any other information required by the Registrar in pursuance of
any of the provisions of the State Act.
243ZQ. Offences and penalties.—(1) The Legislature of a State may,
by law, make provisions for the offences relating to the co-operative societies
and penalties for such offences.
(2) A law made by the Legislature of a State under clause (1) shall
include the commission of the following act or omission as offences, namely:—(a) a co-operative society or an officer or member thereof wilfully
makes a false return or furnishes false information, or any person
wilfully not furnishes any information required from him by a person
authorised in this behalf under the provisions of the State Act;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part IXB.—Co-operative Societies)
142
(b) any person wilfully or without any reasonable excuse disobeys
any summons, requisition or lawful written order issued under the
provisions of the State Act;
(c) any employer who, without sufficient cause, fails to pay to a
co-operative society amount deducted by him from its employee within a
period of fourteen days from the date on which such deduction is made;
(d) any officer or custodian who wilfully fails to handover custody of
books, accounts, documents, records, cash, security and other property
belonging to a co-operative society of which he is an officer or
custodian, to an authorised person; and
(e) whoever, before, during or after the election of members of the
board or office bearers, adopts any corrupt practice.
243ZR. Application to multi-State co-operative societies.—The
provisions of this Part shall apply to the multi-State co-operative societies
subject to the modification that any reference to “Legislature of a State”, “State
Act” or “State Government” shall be construed as a reference to “Parliament”,
“Central Act” or “the Central Government” respectively.
243ZS. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part
shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union
territory, having no Legislative Assembly as if the references to the Legislature
of a State were a reference to the administrator thereof appointed under
article 239 and, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly,
to that Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
direct that the provisions of this Part shall not apply to any Union territory or
part thereof as he may specify in the notification.
243ZT. Continuance of existing laws.— Notwithstanding anything in
this Part, any provision of any law relating to co-operative societies in force in
a State immediately before the commencement of the Constitution
(Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration
of one year from such commencement, whichever is less.]
143
PART X
THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS
244. Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas.—(1) The
provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply to the administration and control of
the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State 1
*** other than 2
[the
States of Assam, 3
[, 4
[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram]]].
(2) The provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply to the
administration of the tribal areas in 2
[the States of Assam, 3
[, 5
[Meghalaya,
Tripura and Mizoram]]]. 6
[244A. Formation of an autonomous State comprising certain tribal
areas in Assam and creation of local Legislature or Council of Ministers or
both therefor.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament
may, by law, form within the State of Assam an autonomous State comprising
(whether wholly or in part) all or any of the tribal areas specified in 7
[Part I] of
the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule and create therefor—
(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly
elected, to function as a Legislature for the autonomous State, or
(b) a Council of Ministers,
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may be
specified in the law.
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) may, in particular,—______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
"the State of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for "and
Meghalaya" (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
4. Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for "Meghalaya and
Tripura" (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for "Meghalaya and Tripura and the Union territory of Mizoram".
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
6. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-9-1969).
7. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
"Part A" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part X.—The Scheduled and Tribal Areas)
144
(a) specify the matters enumerated in the State List or the
Concurrent List with respect to which the Legislature of the autonomous
State shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part thereof,
whether to the exclusion of the Legislature of the State of Assam or
otherwise;
(b) define the matters with respect to which the executive power
of the autonomous State shall extend;
(c) provide that any tax levied by the State of Assam shall be
assigned to the autonomous State in so far as the proceeds thereof are
attributable to the autonomous State;
 (d) provide that any reference to a State in any article of this
Constitution shall be construed as including a reference to the
autonomous State; and
(e) make such supplemental, incidental and consequential
provisions as may be deemed necessary.
(3) An amendment of any such law as aforesaid in so far as such
amendment relates to any of the matters specified in sub-clause (a) or
sub-clause (b) of clause (2) shall have no effect unless the amendment is passed
in each House of Parliament by not less than two-thirds of the members present
and voting.
(4) Any such law as is referred to in this article shall not be deemed to
be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect
of amending this Constitution.]
145
PART XI
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I.—LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS
Distribution of Legislative Powers
245. Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of
States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may
make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, and the
Legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the State.
(2) No law made by Parliament shall be deemed to be invalid on the
ground that it would have extra-territorial operation.
246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the
Legislatures of States.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3),
Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters
enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as
the “Union List”).
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament, and, subject to
clause (1), the Legislature of any State 1
*** also, have power to make laws
with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh
Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the “Concurrent List”).
(3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any State 1
*** has
exclusive power to make laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to
any of the matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this
Constitution referred to as the “State List”).
(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for
any part of the territory of India not included 2
[in a State] notwithstanding that
such matter is a matter enumerated in the State List. 3
[246A. Special provision with respect to goods and services tax.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 246 and 254, Parliament, and,
subject to clause (2), the Legislature of every State, have power to make laws
with respect to goods and services tax imposed by the Union or by such State. ______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for "in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule"
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 2
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States)
146
(2) Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to goods
and services tax where the supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
Explanation.—The provisions of this article, shall, in respect of goods
and services tax referred to in clause (5) of article 279A, take effect from the
date recommended by the Goods and Services Tax Council.]
247. Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain
additional courts.—Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament may
by law provide for the establishment of any additional courts for the better
administration of laws made by Parliament or of any existing laws with respect
to a matter enumerated in the Union List.
248. Residuary powers of legislation.—(1) 1
[Subject to article 246A,
Parliament] has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter
not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List.
(2) Such power shall include the power of making any law imposing a
tax not mentioned in either of those Lists.
249. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the
State List in the national interest.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, if the Council of States has declared by
resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and
voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest that Parliament
should make laws with respect to 2
[goods and services tax provided under article
246A or] any matter enumerated in the State List specified in the resolution, it
shall be lawful for Parliament to make laws for the whole or any part of the
territory of India with respect to that matter while the resolution remains in force.
(2) A resolution passed under clause (1) shall remain in force for such
period not exceeding one year as may be specified therein:
Provided that, if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance
in force of any such resolution is passed in the manner provided in clause (1),
such resolution shall continue in force for a further period of one year from the
date on which under this clause it would otherwise have ceased to be in force.
(3) A law made by Parliament which Parliament would not but for the
passing of a resolution under clause (1) have been competent to make shall, to the
extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of
six months after the resolution has ceased to be in force, except as respects things
done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 3, for
"Parliament" (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States)
147
250. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in
the State List if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament shall, while a
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, have power to make laws for the
whole or any part of the territory of India with respect to 1
[goods and services
tax provided under article 246A or] any of the matters enumerated in the State
List.
(2) A law made by Parliament which Parliament would not but for the
issue of a Proclamation of Emergency have been competent to make shall, to the
extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of
six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, except as respects things
done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period.
251. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles
249 and 250 and laws made by the Legislatures of States.—Nothing in
articles 249 and 250 shall restrict the power of the Legislature of a State to
make any law which under this Constitution it has power to make, but if any
provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any
provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament has under either of the
said articles power to make, the law made by Parliament, whether passed
before or after the law made by the Legislature of the State, shall prevail, and
the law made by the Legislature of the State shall to the extent of the
repugnancy, but so long only as the law made by Parliament continues to have
effect, be inoperative.
252. Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by
consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State.—(1) If it
appears to the Legislatures of two or more States to be desirable that any of the
matters with respect to which Parliament has no power to make laws for the
States except as provided in articles 249 and 250 should be regulated in such
States by Parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are passed by all
the Houses of the Legislatures of those States, it shall be lawful for Parliament
to pass an act for regulating that matter accordingly, and any Act so passed
shall apply to such States and to any other State by which it is adopted
afterwards by resolution passed in that behalf by the House or, where there are
two Houses, by each of the Houses of the Legislature of that State. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 5
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States)
148
(2) Any Act so passed by Parliament may be amended or repealed by an
Act of Parliament passed or adopted in like manner but shall not, as respects
any State to which it applies, be amended or repealed by an Act of the
Legislature of that State.
253. Legislation for giving effect to international agreements.—Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter,
Parliament has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory
of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other
country or countries or any decision made at any international conference,
association or other body.
254. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made
by the Legislatures of States.—(1) If any provision of a law made by the
Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by
Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or to any provision of an
existing law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent
List, then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), the law made by Parliament,
whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislature of such State,
or, as the case may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the
Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State 1
*** with respect to
one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List contains any provision
repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or an existing
law with respect to that matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of such
State shall, if it has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has
received his assent, prevail in that State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent Parliament from
enacting at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law
adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature
of the State.
255. Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to
be regarded as matters of procedure only.—No Act of Parliament or of the
Legislature of a State 1
***, and no provision in any such Act, shall be invalid
by reason only that some recommendation or previous sanction required by this
Constitution was not given, if assent to that Act was given—______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States)
149
(a) where the recommendation required was that of the Governor,
either by the Governor or by the President;
(b) where the recommendation required was that of the
Rajpramukh, either by the Rajpramukh or by the President;
(c) where the recommendation or previous sanction required was
that of the President, by the President.
CHAPTER II.—ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
General
256. Obligation of States and the Union.—The executive power of every
State shall be so exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws made by
Parliament and any existing laws which apply in that State, and the executive
power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as may
appear to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose:
257. Control of the Union over States in certain cases.—(1) The
executive power of every State shall be so exercised as not to impede or
prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union, and the executive
power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as
may appear to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose.
(2) The executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of
directions to a State as to the construction and maintenance of means of
communication declared in the direction to be of national or military
importance:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be taken as restricting the
power of Parliament to declare highways or waterways to be national highways
or national waterways or the power of the Union with respect to the highways
or waterways so declared or the power of the Union to construct and maintain
means of communication as part of its functions with respect to naval, military
and air force works.
(3) The executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of
directions to a State as to the measures to be taken for the protection of the
railways within the State.
(4) Where in carrying out any direction given to a State under clause (2)
as to the construction or maintenance of any means of communication or under
clause (3) as to the measures to be taken for the protection of any railway, costs
have been incurred in excess of those which would have been incurred in the
discharge of the normal duties of the State if such direction had not been given,
there shall be paid by the Government of India to the State such sum as may be
agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator
appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in respect of the extra costs so incurred
by the State.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States)
150
1
[257A. [Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other
forces of the Union.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 33 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).]
258. Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain cases.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may,
with the consent of the Government of a State, entrust either conditionally or
unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any
matter to which the executive power of the Union extends.
(2) A law made by Parliament which applies in any State may,
notwithstanding that it relates to a matter with respect to which the Legislature
of the State has no power to make laws, confer powers and impose duties, or
authorise the conferring of powers and the imposition of duties, upon the State
or officers and authorities thereof.
(3) Where by virtue of this article powers and duties have been conferred
or imposed upon a State or officers or authorities thereof, there shall be paid by
the Government of India to the State such sum as may be agreed, or, in default
of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief
Justice of India, in respect of any extra costs of administration incurred by the
State in connection with the exercise of those powers and duties. 2
[258A. Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Governor of a State may,
with the consent of the Government of India, entrust either conditionally or
unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any
matter to which the executive power of the State extends.]
[259. Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First Schedule.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
260. Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside
India.—The Government of India may by agreement with the Government of
any territory not being part of the territory of India undertake any executive,
legislative or judicial functions vested in the Government of such territory, but
every such agreement shall be subject to, and governed by, any law relating to
the exercise of foreign jurisdiction for the time being in force. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States)
151
261. Public acts, records and judicial proceedings.—(1) Full faith and
credit shall be given throughout the territory of India to public acts, records and
judicial proceedings of the Union and of every State.
(2) The manner in which and the conditions under which the acts,
records and proceedings referred to in clause (1) shall be proved and the effect
thereof determined shall be as provided by law made by Parliament.
(3) Final judgments or orders delivered or passed by civil courts in any
part of the territory of India shall be capable of execution anywhere within that
territory according to law.
Disputes relating to Waters
262. Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers
or river valleys.—(1) Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of
any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution or control of the
waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by
law provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise
jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint as is referred to in
clause (1).
Co-ordination between States
263. Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council.—If at any time
it appears to the President that the public interests would be served by the
establishment of a Council charged with the duty of—
(a) inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may have
arisen between States;
(b) investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of
the States, or the Union and one or more of the States, have a common
interest; or
(c) making recommendations upon any such subject and, in
particular, recommendations for the better co-ordination of policy and
action with respect to that subject,
it shall be lawful for the President by order to establish such a Council, and to
define the nature of the duties to be performed by it and its organisation and
procedure.
152
PART XII
FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS
CHAPTER I.—FINANCE
General 1
[264. Interpretation.—In this Part, “Finance Commission” means a
Finance Commission constituted under article 280.]
265. Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.—No tax shall
be levied or collected except by authority of law.
266. Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the
States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of article 267 and to the provisions of
this Chapter with respect to the assignment of the whole or part of the net
proceeds of certain taxes and duties to States, all revenues received by the
Government of India, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of
treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by
that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be
entitled “the Consolidated Fund of India”, and all revenues received by the
Government of a State, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of
treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by
that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be
entitled “the Consolidated Fund of the State”.
(2) All other public moneys received by or on behalf of the Government
of India or the Government of a State shall be credited to the public account of
India or the public account of the State, as the case may be.
(3) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the
Consolidated Fund of a State shall be appropriated except in accordance with
law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Constitution.
267. Contingency Fund.—(1) Parliament may by law establish a
Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be entitled “the Contingency
Fund of India” into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be
determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the
President to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the
purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such
expenditure by Parliament by law under article 115 or article 116. ______________________________________________
1 Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for art. 264
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
153
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law establish a Contingency Fund in
the nature of an imprest to be entitled “the Contingency Fund of the State” into
which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by such
law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the Governor 1
*** of the
State to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of
meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the
Legislature of the State by law under article 205 or article 206.
Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States
268. Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by
the States.—(1) Such stamp duties 2*** as are mentioned in the Union List shall
be levied by the Government of India but shall be collected—(a) in the case where such duties are leviable within any 3
[Union
territory], by the Government of India, and
(b) in other cases, by the States within which such duties are
respectively leviable.
(2) The proceeds in any financial year of any such duty leviable within
any State shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be
assigned to that State. 4
268A. [Service tax levied by Union and collected and appropriated by
the Union and the States.].—Omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and
First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "and such duties of excise on medicinal and toilet preparations"
omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 6,
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for "State
Specified in Part C of the First Schedule" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (date not notifed).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
154
269. Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the
States.—1
[(1) Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods and taxes on the
consignment of goods 2
[except as provided in article 269A] shall be levied and
collected by the Government of India but shall be assigned and shall be deemed
to have been assigned to the States on or after the 1st day of April, 1996 in the
manner provided in clause (2).
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—(a) the expression "taxes on the sale or purchase of goods" shall
mean taxes on sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where
such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce;
(b) the expression "taxes on the consignment of goods" shall mean
taxes on the consignment of goods (whether the consignment is to the
person making it or to any other person), where such consignment takes
place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
(2) The net proceeds in any financial year of any such tax, except in so
far as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable to Union territories, shall
not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the
States within which that tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed
among those States in accordance with such principles of distribution as may be
formulated by Parliament by law.] 3
[(3) Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a 4
[sale or purchase of, or consignment of goods] takes place in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce.] 5
[269A. Levy and collection of goods and services tax in course of
inter-State trade or commerce.— (1) Goods and services tax on supplies in
the course of inter-State trade or commerce shall be levied and collected by the
Government of India and such tax shall be apportioned between the Union and
the States in the manner as may be provided by Parliament by law on the
recommendations of the Goods and Services Tax Council. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000. s. 2, for cls. (1) and (2)
(w.e.f. 9-6-2000).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016 s. 8,
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11-9-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982. s. 2, for "sale or
purchase of goods" (w.e.f. 2-2-1983).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 9
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
155
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, supply of goods, or of
services, or both in the course of import into the territory of India shall be
deemed to be supply of goods, or of services, or both in the course of interState trade or commerce.
(2) The amount apportioned to a State under clause (1) shall not form
part of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(3) Where an amount collected as tax levied under clause (1) has been
used for payment of the tax levied by a State under article 246A, such amount
shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(4) Where an amount collected as tax levied by a State under article
246A has been used for payment of the tax levied under clause (1), such
amount shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of the State.
(5) Parliament may, by law, formulate the principles for determining the
place of supply, and when a supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.] 1
[270. Taxes levied and distributed between the Union and the
States.—(1) All taxes and duties referred to in the Union List, except the duties
and taxes referred to in 2
[articles 268, 269 and 269A], respectively, surcharge
on taxes and duties referred to in article 271 and any cess levied for specific
purposes under any law made by Parliament shall be levied and collected by
the Government of India and shall be distributed between the Union and the
States in the manner provided in clause (2). 3
[(1A) The tax collected by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A
shall also be distributed between the Union and the States in the manner
provided in clause (2).
(1B) The tax levied and collected by the Union under clause (2) of
article 246A and article 269A, which has been used for payment of the tax
levied by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A, and the amount
apportioned to the Union under clause (1) of article 269A, shall also be
distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause
(2).] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 3, for art. 270
(w.e.f. 1-4-1996).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3, for “articles 268
and 269” (not enforced) and further subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First
Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 10, for “arts. 268, 268A and 269” (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
156
(2) Such percentage, as may be prescribed, of the net proceeds of any
such tax or duty in any financial year shall not form part of the Consolidated
Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax or duty
is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those States in such
manner and from such time as may be prescribed in the manner provided in
clause (3).
(3) In this article, "prescribed" means, —(i) until a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by
the President by order, and
(ii) after a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by
the President by order after considering the recommendations of the
Finance Commission.]
271. Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the
Union.—Notwithstanding anything in articles 269 and 270, Parliament may at
any time increase any of the duties or taxes referred to in those articles 1
[except
the goods and services tax under article 246A,] by a surcharge for purposes of
the Union and the whole proceeds of any such surcharge shall form part of the
Consolidated Fund of India.
[272. Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union and may be
distributed between the Union and the States.].—Omitted by the Constitution
(Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 4. (w.e.f. 9-6-2000).
273. Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products.—(1)
There shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in each year as
grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States of Assam, Bihar, 2
[Odisha] and West
Bengal, in lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds in each year of
export duty on jute and jute products to those States, such sums as may be
prescribed.
(2) The sums so prescribed shall continue to be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India so long as any export duty on jute or jute products
continues to be levied by the Government of India or until the expiration of ten
years from the commencement of this Constitution whichever is earlier. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 11
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Subs. by the Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011 (15 of 2011), s. 5, for "Orissa"
(w.e.f. 1-11-2011).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
157
(3) In this article, the expression “prescribed” has the same meaning as
in article 270.
274. Prior recommendation of President required to Bills affecting
taxation in which States are interested.—(1) No Bill or amendment which
imposes or varies any tax or duty in which States are interested, or which varies
the meaning of the expression “agricultural income” as defined for the purposes
of the enactments relating to Indian income-tax, or which affects the principles
on which under any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter moneys are or
may be distributable to States, or which imposes any such surcharge for the
purposes of the Union as is mentioned in the foregoing provisions of this
Chapter, shall be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament except on
the recommendation of the President.
(2) In this article, the expression “tax or duty in which States are
interested” means—
(a) a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof are
assigned to any State; or
(b) a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds whereof sums
are for the time being payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India to
any State.
275. Grants from the Union to certain States.—(1) Such sums as
Parliament may by law provide shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of
India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as Parliament
may determine to be in need of assistance, and different sums may be fixed for
different States:
Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as
grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may
be necessary to enable that State to meet the costs of such schemes of
development as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the
Government of India for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled
Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas
therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State:
Provided further that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of
India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Assam sums, capital and
recurring, equivalent to—
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
158
(a) the average excess of expenditure over the revenues during the
two years immediately preceding the commencement of this Constitution
in respect of the administration of the tribal areas specified in 1
[Part I] of
the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule; and
(b) the costs of such schemes of development as may be
undertaken by that State with the approval of the Government of India
for the purpose of raising the level of administration of the said areas to
that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State. 2
[(1A) On and from the formation of the autonomous State under article
244A,—
(i) any sums payable under clause (a) of the second proviso to
clause (1) shall, if the autonomous State comprises all the tribal areas
referred to therein, be paid to the autonomous State, and, if the
autonomous State comprises only some of those tribal areas, be
apportioned between the State of Assam and the autonomous State as the
President may, by order, specify;
(ii) there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as
grants-in-aid of the revenues of the autonomous State sums, capital and
recurring, equivalent to the costs of such schemes of development as
may be undertaken by the autonomous State with the approval of the
Government of India for the purpose of raising the level of
administration of that State to that of the administration of the rest of the
State of Assam.]
(2) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (1), the powers
conferred on Parliament under that clause shall be exercisable by the President
by order and any order made by the President under this clause shall have effect
subject to any provision so made by Parliament:
Provided that after a Finance Commission has been constituted no order
shall be made under this clause by the President except after considering the
recommendations of the Finance Commission.
276. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in article 246, no law of the Legislature of a State relating
to taxes for the benefit of the State or of a municipality, district board, local board or
other local authority therein in respect of professions, trades, callings or
employments shall be invalid on the ground that it relates to a tax on income. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971) s. 71,
for "Part A" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25-9-1969).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
159
(2) The total amount payable in respect of any one person to the State or
to any one municipality, district board, local board or other local authority in
the State by way of taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments
shall not exceed 1
[two thousand and five hundred rupees] per annum. 2
* * * *
(3) The power of the Legislature of a State to make laws as aforesaid
with respect to taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments shall not
be construed as limiting in any way the power of Parliament to make laws with
respect to taxes on income accruing from or arising out of professions, trades,
callings and employments.
277. Savings.—Any taxes, duties, cesses or fees which, immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution, were being lawfully levied by
the Government of any State or by any municipality or other local authority or
body for the purposes of the State, municipality, district or other local area
may, notwithstanding that those taxes, duties, cesses or fees are mentioned in
the Union List, continue to be levied and to be applied to the same purposes
until provision to the contrary is made by Parliament by law.
278. [Agreement with States in Part B of the First Schedule with regard
to certain financial matters.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
279. Calculation of “net proceeds”, etc.—(1) In the foregoing
provisions of this Chapter, “net proceeds” means in relation to any tax or duty
the proceeds thereof reduced by the cost of collection, and for the purposes of
those provisions the net proceeds of any tax or duty, or of any part of any tax or
duty, in or attributable to any area shall be ascertained and certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, whose certificate shall be final.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, and to any other express provision of this
Chapter, a law made by Parliament or an order of the President may, in any
case where under this Part the proceeds of any duty or tax are, or may be,
assigned to any State, provide for the manner in which the proceeds are to be
calculated, for the time from or at which and the manner in which any
payments are to be made, for the making of adjustments between one financial
year and another, and for any other incidental or ancillary matters. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixtieth Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 2, for "two hundred and
fifty rupees" (w.e.f. 20-12-1988).
2. Proviso omitted by s.2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-12-1988).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
160
1
[279A. Goods and Services Tax Council.—(1) The President shall,
within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Constitution (One
Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, by order, constitute a Council to be
called the Goods and Services Tax Council.
(2) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
(a) the Union Finance Minister —Chairperson;
(b) the Union Minister of State in charge of Revenue or
Finance — Member;
(c) the Minister in charge of Finance or Taxation or any other
Minister nominated by each State Government —Members.
(3) The Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council referred to in
sub-clause (c) of clause (2) shall, as soon as may be, choose one amongst
themselves to be the Vice-Chairperson of the Council for such period as they
may decide.
(4) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall make recommendations to
the Union and the States on—
(a) the taxes, cesses and surcharges levied by the Union, the
States and the local bodies which may be subsumed in the goods and
services tax;
(b) the goods and services that may be subjected to, or exempted
from, the goods and services tax;
(c) model Goods and Services Tax Laws, principles of levy,
apportionment of Goods and Services Tax levied on supplies in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce under article 269A and the
principles that govern the place of supply;
(d) the threshold limit of turnover below which goods and services
may be exempted from goods and services tax;
(e) the rates including floor rates with bands of goods and services
tax;
(f) any special rate or rates for a specified period, to raise
additional resources during any natural calamity or disaster; ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 12
(w.e.f. 12-9-2016). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
161
(g) special provision with respect to the States of Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand; and
(h) any other matter relating to the goods and services tax, as the
Council may decide.
(5) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall recommend the date on
which the goods and services tax be levied on petroleum crude, high speed
diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), natural gas and aviation
turbine fuel.
(6) While discharging the functions conferred by this article, the Goods
and Services Tax Council shall be guided by the need for a harmonised
structure of goods and services tax and for the development of a harmonised
national market for goods and services.
(7) One-half of the total number of Members of the Goods and Services
Tax Council shall constitute the quorum at its meetings.
(8) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall determine the procedure
in the performance of its functions.
(9) Every decision of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall be taken
at a meeting, by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the weighted votes
of the members present and voting, in accordance with the following principles,
namely:—
(a) the vote of the Central Government shall have a weightage of
one-third of the total votes cast; and
(b) the votes of all the State Governments taken together shall
have a weightage of two-thirds of the total votes cast,
in that meeting. (10) No act or proceedings of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall
be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the
Council; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the
Council; or
(c) any procedural irregularity of the Council not affecting the
merits of the case.
(11) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall establish a mechanism to
adjudicate any dispute—
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
162
(a) between the Government of India and one or more States; or
(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on
one side and one or more other States on the other side; or
(c) between two or more States,
arising out of the recommendations of the Council or implementation thereof.]
280. Finance Commission.—(1) The President shall, within two years
from the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of
every fifth year or at such earlier time as the President considers necessary, by
order constitute a Finance Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and
four other members to be appointed by the President.
(2) Parliament may by law determine the qualifications which shall be
requisite for appointment as members of the Commission and the manner in
which they shall be selected.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to
the President as to—
(a) the distribution between the Union and the States of the net
proceeds of taxes which are to be, or may be, divided between them
under this Chapter and the allocation between the States of the respective
shares of such proceeds;
(b) the principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the
revenues of the States out of the Consolidated Fund of India; 1
[(bb) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a
State to supplement the resources of the Panchayats in the State on the basis
of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of the State;] 2
[(c) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a
State to supplement the resources of the Municipalities in the State on
the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of
the State;] 3
[(d)] any other matter referred to the Commission by the
President in the interests of sound finance.
(4) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such
powers in the performance of their functions as Parliament may by law confer
on them. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).
3. Sub-clause (c) re-lettered as sub-clause (d) by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
163
281. Recommendations of the Finance Commission.—The President
shall cause every recommendation made by the Finance Commission under the
provisions of this Constitution together with an explanatory memorandum as to
the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions
282. Expenditure defrayable by the Union or a State out of its revenues.—The Union or a State may make any grants for any public purpose,
notwithstanding that the purpose is not one with respect to which Parliament or
the Legislature of the State, as the case may be, may make laws.
283. Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and
moneys credited to the public accounts.—(1) The custody of the
Consolidated Fund of India and the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of
moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of
public moneys other than those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf
of the Government of India, their payment into the public account of India and
the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected
with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by
Parliament, and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by
rules made by the President.
(2) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State and the
Contingency Fund of a State, the payment of moneys into such Funds, the
withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than
those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of the
State, their payment into the public account of the State and the withdrawal of
moneys from such account and all other matters connected with or ancillary to
matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by the Legislature of the
State, and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by rules
made by the Governor 1
*** of the State.
284. Custody of suitors' deposits and other moneys received by
public servants and courts.—All moneys received by or deposited with—(a) any officer employed in connection with the affairs of the
Union or of a State in his capacity as such, other than revenues or
public moneys raised or received by the Government of India or the
Government of the State, as the case may be; or
(b) any court within the territory of India to the credit of any
cause, matter, account or persons, ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
164
shall be paid into the public account of India or the public account of State, as
the case may be.
285. Exemption of property of the Union from State taxation.—(1)
The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law
otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or by any
authority within a State.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise
provides, prevent any authority within a State from levying any tax on any
property of the Union to which such property was immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution liable or treated as liable, so long as that
tax continues to be levied in that State.
286. Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of
goods.—(1) No law of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a
tax on 1
[the supply of goods or of services or both, where such supply takes
place]—
(a) outside the State; or
(b) in the course of the import of the 2
[goods or services or both]
into, or export of the 2
[goods or services or both] out of, the territory of
India. 3
[* * * *] 4
[(2) Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a 5
[supply of goods or of services or both] in any of the ways mentioned in
clause (1). 6
[(3) * * * *]
287. Exemption from taxes on electricity.—Save in so far as
Parliament may by law otherwise provide, no law of a State shall impose, or
authorise the imposition of, a tax on the consumption or sale of electricity
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 13, (i)(A)
for "the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes place"
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Subs. by s. 13 (i)(B), ibid., for "goods" (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Explanation to cl. (1) omitted by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 4
(w.e.f. 11-9-1956).
4. Subs. by s.4, ibid., for cls. (2) and (3) (w.e.f. 11-9-1956).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 13(ii),
for "sale or purchase of goods takes place" (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
6. Cl. (3) omitted by s. 13 (iii), ibid. (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
165
(whether produced by a Government or other persons) which is—
(a) consumed by the Government of India, or sold to the
Government of India for consumption by that Government; or
(b) consumed in the construction, maintenance or operation of any
railway by the Government of India or a railway company operating that
railway, or sold to that Government or any such railway company for
consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any
railway,
and any such law imposing, or authorising the imposition of, a tax on the sale
of electricity shall secure that the price of electricity sold to the Government of
India for consumption by that Government, or to any such railway company as
aforesaid for consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any
railway, shall be less by the amount of the tax than the price charged to other
consumers of a substantial quantity of electricity.
288. Exemption from taxation by States in respect of water or
electricity in certain cases.—(1) Save in so far as the President may by order
otherwise provide, no law of a State in force immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution shall impose, or authorise the imposition
of, a tax in respect of any water or electricity stored, generated, consumed,
distributed or sold by any authority established by any existing law or any law
made by Parliament for regulating or developing any inter-State river or
river-valley.
Explanation.—The expression “law of a State in force” in this clause
shall include a law of a State passed or made before the commencement of this
Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it
may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law impose, or authorise the
imposition of, any such tax as is mentioned in clause (1), but no such law shall
have any effect unless it has, after having been reserved for the consideration of
the President, received his assent; and if any such law provides for the fixation
of the rates and other incidents of such tax by means of rules or orders to be
made under the law by any authority, the law shall provide for the previous
consent of the President being obtained to the making of any such rule or order.
289. Exemption of property and income of a State from Union
taxation.—(1) The property and income of a State shall be exempt from Union
taxation.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
166
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from imposing, or
authorising the imposition of, any tax to such extent, if any, as Parliament may
by law provide in respect of a trade or business of any kind carried on by, or on
behalf of, the Government of a State, or any operations connected therewith, or
any property used or occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or any
income accruing or arising in connection therewith.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, or to any
class of trade or business, which Parliament may by law declare to be incidental
to the ordinary functions of Government.
290. Adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions.—Where under the provisions of this Constitution the expenses of any court or
Commission, or the pension payable to or in respect of a person who has served
before the commencement of this Constitution under the Crown in India or
after such commencement in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a
State, are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund
of a State, then, if—
(a) in the case of a charge on the Consolidated Fund of India, the
court or Commission serves any of the separate needs of a State, or the
person has served wholly or in part in connection with the affairs of a
State; or
(b) in the case of a charge on the Consolidated Fund of a State, the
court or Commission serves any of the separate needs of the Union or
another State, or the person has served wholly or in part in connection
with the affairs of the Union or another State,
there shall be charged on and paid out of the Consolidated Fund of the State or,
as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of
the other State, such contribution in respect of the expenses or pension as may
be agreed, or as may in default of agreement be determined by an arbitrator to
be appointed by the Chief Justice of India. 1
[290A. Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds.—A sum of
forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, and paid out of,
the Consolidated Fund of the State of Kerala every year to the Travancore
Devaswom Fund; and a sum of thirteen lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be
charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the State of 2
[Tamil
Nadu] every year to the Devaswom Fund established in that State for the
maintenance of Hindu temples and shrines in the territories transferred to that
State on the 1st day of November, 1956, from the State of Travancore-Cochin.] ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 4, for
"Madras" (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
167
291. [Privy purse sums of Rulers.].—Omitted by the Constitution
(Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-12-1971).
CHAPTER II.—BORROWING
292. Borrowing by the Government of India.—The executive power
of the Union extends to borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund
of India within such limits, if any, as may from time to time be fixed by
Parliament by law and to the giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as
may be so fixed.
293. Borrowing by States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this article,
the executive power of a State extends to borrowing within the territory of India
upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the State within such limits, if any,
as may from time to time be fixed by the Legislature of such State by law and to
the giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so fixed.
(2) The Government of India may, subject to such conditions as may be
laid down by or under any law made by Parliament, make loans to any State or,
so long as any limits fixed under article 292 are not exceeded, give guarantees
in respect of loans raised by any State, and any sums required for the purpose
of making such loans shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(3) A State may not without the consent of the Government of India raise
any loan if there is still outstanding any part of a loan which has been made to
the State by the Government of India or by its predecessor Government, or in
respect of which a guarantee has been given by the Government of India or by
its predecessor Government.
(4) A consent under clause (3) may be granted subject to such
conditions, if any, as the Government of India may think fit to impose.
CHAPTER III.—PROPERTY, CONTRACTS, RIGHTS, LIABILITIES, OBLIGATIONS AND SUITS
294. Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations
in certain cases.—As from the commencement of this Constitution—(a) all property and assets which immediately before such
commencement were vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the
Government of the Dominion of India and all property and assets which
immediately before such commencement were vested in His Majesty for
the purposes of the Government of each Governor’s Province shall vest
respectively in the Union and the corresponding State; and 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
168
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of the
Dominion of India and of the Government of each Governor's Province,
whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the rights,
liabilities and obligations respectively of the Government of India and
the Government of each corresponding State,
subject to any adjustment made or to be made by reason of the creation before
the commencement of this Constitution of the Dominion of Pakistan or of the
Provinces of West Bengal, East Bengal, West Punjab and East Punjab.
295. Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations
in other cases.—(1) As from the commencement of this Constitution—(a) all property and assets which immediately before such
commencement were vested in any Indian State corresponding to a State
specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union, if the
purposes for which such property and assets were held immediately
before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the Union
relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List, and
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of any
Indian State corresponding to a State specified in Part B of the First
Schedule, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the
rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of India, if the purposes
for which such rights were acquired or liabilities or obligations were incurred
before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the Government
of India relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List,
subject to any agreement entered into in that behalf by the Government of India
with the Government of that State.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Government of each State specified in Part B
of the First Schedule shall, as from the commencement of this Constitution, be the
successor of the Government of the corresponding Indian State as regards all
property and assets and all rights, liabilities and obligations, whether arising out
of any contract or otherwise, other than those referred to in clause (1).
296. Property accruing by escheat or lapse or as bona vacantia.—Subject as hereinafter provided, any property in the territory of India which, if
this Constitution had not come into operation, would have accrued to His Majesty
or, as the case may be, to the Ruler of an Indian State by escheat or lapse, or as
bona vacantia for want of a rightful owner, shall, if it is property situate in a
State, vest in such State, and shall, in any other case, vest in the Union:
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
169
Provided that any property which at the date when it would have so
accrued to His Majesty or to the Ruler of an Indian State was in the possession
or under the control of the Government of India or the Government of a State
shall, according as the purposes for which it was then used or held were
purposes of the Union or of a State, vest in the Union or in that State.
Explanation.—In this article, the expressions “Ruler” and “Indian State”
have the same meanings as in article 363. 1
[297. Things of value within territorial waters or continental shelf
and resources of the exclusive economic zone to vest in the Union.—(1) All
lands, minerals and other things of value underlying the ocean within the
territorial waters, or the continental shelf, or the exclusive economic zone, of
India shall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union.
(2) All other resources of the exclusive economic zone of India shall also
vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union.
(3) The limits of the territorial waters, the continental shelf, the exclusive
economic zone, and other maritime zones, of India shall be such as may be
specified, from time to time, by or under any law made by Parliament.] 2
[298. Power to carry on trade, etc.—The executive power of the
Union and of each State shall extend to the carrying on of any trade or business
and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the making of
contracts for any purpose:
Provided that—
(a) the said executive power of the Union shall, in so far as such
trade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which
Parliament may make laws, be subject in each State to legislation by the
State; and
(b) the said executive power of each State shall, in so far as such
trade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which the
State Legislature may make laws, be subject to legislation by
Parliament.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits)
170
299. Contracts.—(1) All contracts made in the exercise of the executive
power of the Union or of a State shall be expressed to be made by the
President, or by the Governor 1
*** of the State, as the case may be, and all such
contracts and all assurances of property made in the exercise of that power shall
be executed on behalf of the President or the Governor 1
*** by such persons
and in such manner as he may direct or authorise.
(2) Neither the President nor the Governor 2
*** shall be personally liable
in respect of any contract or assurance made or executed for the purposes of
this Constitution, or for the purposes of any enactment relating to the
Government of India heretofore in force, nor shall any person making or
executing any such contract or assurance on behalf of any of them be
personally liable in respect thereof.
300. Suits and proceedings.—(1) The Government of India may sue or
be sued by the name of the Union of India and the Government of a State may
sue or be sued by the name of the State and may, subject to any provisions
which may be made by Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of such State
enacted by virtue of powers conferred by this Constitution, sue or be sued in
relation to their respective affairs in the like cases as the Dominion of India and
the corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian States might have
sued or been sued if this Constitution had not been enacted.
(2) If at the commencement of this Constitution—(a) any legal proceedings are pending to which the Dominion of
India is a party, the Union of India shall be deemed to be substituted for
the Dominion in those proceedings; and
(b) any legal proceedings are pending to which a Province or an
Indian State is a party, the corresponding State shall be deemed to be
substituted for the Province or the Indian State in those proceedings. 3
[CHAPTER IV.—RIGHT TO PROPERTY300A. Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of
law.— No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law.] ______________________________________________
1. The words "or the Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "nor the Rajpramukh" omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 34 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
171
PART XIII
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE WITHIN THE
TERRITORY OF INDIA
301. Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.—Subject to the
other provisions of this Part, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the
territory of India shall be free.
302. Power of Parliament to impose restrictions on trade, commerce
and intercourse.—Parliament may by law impose such restrictions on the
freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one State and another or
within any part of the territory of India as may be required in the public
interest.
303. Restrictions on the legislative powers of the Union and of the
States with regard to trade and commerce.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
in article 302, neither Parliament nor the Legislature of a State shall have power
to make any law giving, or authorising the giving of, any preference to one
State over another, or making, or authorising the making of, any discrimination
between one State and another, by virtue of any entry relating to trade and
commerce in any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent Parliament from making any law
giving, or authorising the giving of, any preference or making, or authorising
the making of, any discrimination if it is declared by such law that it is
necessary to do so for the purpose of dealing with a situation arising from
scarcity of goods in any part of the territory of India.
304. Restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse among
States.—Notwithstanding anything in article 301 or article 303, the
Legislature of a State may by law—(a) impose on goods imported from other States 1
[or the Union
territories] any tax to which similar goods manufactured or produced in
that State are subject, so, however, as not to discriminate between goods
so imported and goods so manufactured or produced; and
(b) impose such reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade,
commerce or intercourse with or within that State as may be required in
the public interest: ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIII.—Trade, Commerce and Intercourse within the Territory of India)
172
Provided that no Bill or amendment for the purposes of clause (b) shall
be introduced or moved in the Legislature of a State without the previous
sanction of the President. 1
[305. Saving of existing laws and laws providing for State
monopolies.—Nothing in articles 301 and 303 shall affect the provisions of
any existing law except in so far as the President may by order otherwise
direct; and nothing in article 301 shall affect the operation of any law made
before the commencement of the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955,
in so far as it relates to, or prevent Parliament or the Legislature of a State from
making any law relating to, any such matter as is referred to in sub-clause (ii)
of clause (6) of article 19.]
306. [Power of certain States in Part B of the First Schedule to
impose restrictions on trade and commerce.].—Omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956)
307. Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of
articles 301 to 304.—Parliament may by law appoint such authority as it
considers appropriate for carrying out the purposes of articles 301, 302, 303
and 304, and confer on the authority so appointed such powers and such duties
as it thinks necessary.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 4, for art. 305
(w.e.f. 27-4-1955).
173
PART XIV
SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I.—SERVICES
308. Interpretation.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,
the expression “State” 1
[does not include the State of Jammu and Kashmir].
309. Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the
Union or a State.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Acts of the
appropriate Legislature may regulate the recruitment, and conditions of service
of persons appointed, to public services and posts in connection with the affairs
of the Union or of any State:
Provided that it shall be competent for the President or such person as he
may direct in the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the
Union, and for the Governor 2
*** of a State or such person as he may direct in
the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State, to
make rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons
appointed, to such services and posts until provision in that behalf is made by
or under an Act of the appropriate Legislature under this article, and any rules
so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any such Act.
310. Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a State.—(1)
Except as expressly provided by this Constitution, every person who is a
member of a defence service or of a civil service of the Union or of an
all-India service or holds any post connected with defence or any civil post
under the Union holds office during the pleasure of the President, and every
person who is a member of a civil service of a State or holds any civil post
under a State holds office during the pleasure of the Governor 3
*** of the
State.
(2) Notwithstanding that a person holding a civil post under the Union or
a State holds office during the pleasure of the President or, as the case may be,
of the Governor 2
*** of the State, any contract under which a person, not being
a member of a defence service or of an all-India service or of a civil service of
the Union or a State, is appointed under this Constitution to hold such a post
may, if the President or the Governor 42
***, as the case may be, deems it ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for "means
a State specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by s.29 and Sch., ibid (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. The words "or, as the case may be, the Rajpramukh" omitted by s.29 and Sch., ibid. .
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)
174
necessary in order to secure the services of a person having special
qualifications, provide for the payment to him of compensation, if before the
expiration of an agreed period that post is abolished or he is, for reasons not
connected with any misconduct on his part, required to vacate that post.
311. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in
civil capacities under the Union or a State.—(1) No person who is a member
of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a
State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or
removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed. 1
[(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or
reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of those charges 2
***: 3
[Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon
him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the
evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such
person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed:
Provided further that this clause shall not apply—]
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on
the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal
charge; or
(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person
or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded
by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such
inquiry; or
(c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is
satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient
to hold such inquiry.
(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises
whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in
clause (2), the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or
remove such person or to reduce him in rank shall be final.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 10, for cls. (2) and (3)
(w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
2. Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 44
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Subs. by s. 44, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)
175
312. All-India services.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in 1
[Chapter VI
of Part VI or Part XI], if the Council of States has declared by resolution
supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it
is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament may by
law provide for the creation of one or more all India services 2
[(including an
all-India judicial service)] common to the Union and the States, and, subject to
the other provisions of this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the
conditions of service of persons appointed, to any such service.
(2) The services known at the commencement of this Constitution as the
Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service shall be deemed to
be services created by Parliament under this article. 2
[(3) The all-India judicial service referred to in clause (1) shall not
include any post inferior to that of a district judge as defined in article 236.
(4) The law providing for the creation of the all-India judicial service
aforesaid may contain such provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of
Part VI as may be necessary for giving effect to the provisions of that law and
no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the
purposes of article 368.] 3
[312A. Power of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service
of officers of certain services.—(1) Parliament may by law—(a) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the
conditions of services as respects remuneration, leave and pension and
the rights as respects disciplinary matters of persons who, having been
appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a
civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this
Constitution, continue on and after the commencement of the
Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, to serve under the
Government of India or of a State in any service or post; ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 45, for "Part XI"
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Ins. by s. 45, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29-8-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)
176
(b) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the
conditions of service as respects pension of persons who, having been
appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a
civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this
Constitution, retired or otherwise ceased to be in service at any time
before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-eighth
Amendment) Act, 1972:
Provided that in the case of any such person who is holding or has held
the office of the Chief Justice or other Judge of the Supreme Court or a High
Court, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, the Chairman or other
member of the Union or a State Public Service Commission or the Chief
Election Commissioner, nothing in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) shall be
construed as empowering Parliament to vary or revoke, after his appointment
to such post, the conditions of his service to his disadvantage except in so far as
such conditions of service are applicable to him by reason of his being a
person appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a
civil service of the Crown in India.
(2) Except to the extent provided for by Parliament by law under this
article, nothing in this article shall affect the power of any Legislature or other
authority under any other provision of this Constitution to regulate the
conditions of service of persons referred to in clause (1).
(3) Neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in—(a) any dispute arising out of any provision of, or any
endorsement on, any covenant, agreement or other similar instrument
which was entered into or executed by any person referred to in
clause (1), or arising out of any letter issued to such person, in relation to
his appointment to any civil service of the Crown in India or his
continuance in service under the Government of the Dominion of India
or a Province thereof;
(b) any dispute in respect of any right, liability or obligation
under article 314 as originally enacted.
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding
anything in article 314 as originally enacted or in any other provision of this
Constitution.]
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)
177
313. Transitional provisions.—Until other provision is made in this
behalf under this Constitution, all the laws in force immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution and applicable to any public service or any
post which continues to exist after the commencement of this Constitution, as
an all-India service or as service or post under the Union or a State shall
continue in force so far as consistent with the provisions of this Constitution.
314. [Provision for protection of existing officers of certain services.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972,
s. 3 (w.e.f. 29-8-1972). CHAPTER II.— PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS
315. Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this article, there shall be a Public Service
Commission for the Union and a Public Service Commission for each State.
(2) Two or more States may agree that there shall be one Public Service
Commission for that group of States, and if a resolution to that effect is passed
by the House or, where there are two Houses, by each House of the Legislature
of each of those States, Parliament may by law provide for the appointment of a
Joint State Public Service Commission (referred to in this Chapter as Joint
Commission) to serve the needs of those States.
(3) Any such law as aforesaid may contain such incidental and
consequential provisions as may be necessary or desirable for giving effect to
the purposes of the law.
(4) The Public Service Commission for the Union, if requested so to do
by the Governor 1
*** of a State, may, with the approval of the President, agree
to serve all or any of the needs of the State.
(5) References in this Constitution to the Union Public Service
Commission or a State Public Service Commission shall, unless the context
otherwise requires, be construed as references to the Commission serving the
needs of the Union or, as the case may be, the State as respects the particular
matter in question.
316. Appointment and term of office of members.—(1) The Chairman
and other members of a Public Service Commission shall be appointed, in the
case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, by the President, and in
the case of a State Commission, by the Governor of the State: ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)
178
Provided that as nearly as may be one-half of the members of every
Public Service Commission shall be persons who at the dates of their respective
appointments have held office for at least ten years either under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State, and in computing the
said period of ten years any period before the commencement of this
Constitution during which a person has held office under the Crown in India or
under the Government of an Indian State shall be included. 1
[(1A) If the office of the Chairman of the Commission becomes vacant
or if any such Chairman is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable
to perform the duties of his office, those duties shall, until some person
appointed under clause (1) to the vacant office has entered on the duties thereof
or, as the case may be, until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be performed
by such one of the other members of the Commission as the President, in the
case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor of the
State in the case of a State Commission, may appoint for the purpose.]
(2) A member of a Public Service Commission shall hold office for a
term of six years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he
attains, in the case of the Union Commission, the age of sixty-five years, and in
the case of a State Commission or a Joint Commission, the age of 2
[sixty-two
years], whichever is earlier:
Provided that—
(a) a member of a Public Service Commission may, by writing under
his hand addressed, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint
Commission, to the President, and in the case of a State Commission, to
the Governor 3
*** of the State, resign his office;
(b) a member of a Public Service Commission may be removed from
his office in the manner provided in clause (1) or clause (3) of
article 317.
(3) A person who holds office as a member of a Public Service
Commission shall, on the expiration of his term of office, be ineligible for
re-appointment to that office. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 11 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-first Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2, for "sixty years"
(w.e.f. 7-9-1976).
3. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)
179
317. Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service
Commission.—(1) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), the Chairman or
any other member of a Public Service Commission shall only be removed from
his office by order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour after the
Supreme Court, on reference being made to it by the President, has, on inquiry
held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf under
article 145, reported that the Chairman or such other member, as the case may
be, ought on any such ground to be removed.
(2) The President, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint
Commission, and the Governor 1
*** in the case of a State Commission, may
suspend from office the Chairman or any other member of the Commission in
respect of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under
clause (1) until the President has passed orders on receipt of the report of the
Supreme Court on such reference.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), the President may by order
remove from office the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service
Commission if the Chairman or such other member, as the case may be,—(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside
the duties of his office; or
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by
reason of infirmity of mind or body.
(4) If the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service
Commission is or becomes in any way concerned or interested in any contract
or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or the
Government of a State or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any
benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a member and in
common with the other members of an incorporated company, he shall, for the
purposes of clause (1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.
318. Power to make regulations as to conditions of service of
members and staff of the Commission.—In the case of the Union
Commission or a Joint Commission, the President and, in the case of a State
Commission, the Governor 1
*** of the State may by regulations—______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)
180
(a) determine the number of members of the Commission and their
conditions of service; and
(b) make provision with respect to the number of members of the
staff of the Commission and their conditions of service:
Provided that the conditions of service of a member of a Public Service
Commission shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
319. Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of
Commission on ceasing to be such members.—On ceasing to hold office—(a) the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission shall be
ineligible for further employment either under the Government of India
or under the Government of a State;
(b) the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission shall be
eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any other member of the
Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of any other State
Public Service Commission, but not for any other employment either
under the Government of India or under the Government of a State;
(c) a member other than the Chairman of the Union Public Service
Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman of the
Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of a State Public
Service Commission, but not for any other employment either under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State;
(d) a member other than the Chairman of a State Public Service
Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any
other member of the Union Public Service Commission or as the
Chairman of that or any other State Public Service Commission, but not
for any other employment either under the Government of India or under
the Government of a State.
320. Functions of Public Service Commissions.—(1) It shall be the
duty of the Union and the State Public Service Commissions to conduct
examinations for appointments to the services of the Union and the services of
the State respectively.
(2) It shall also be the duty of the Union Public Service Commission, if
requested by any two or more States so to do, to assist those States in framing
and operating schemes of joint recruitment for any services for which
candidates possessing special qualifications are required.
(3) The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service
Commission, as the case may be, shall be consulted—
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)
181
(a) on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil
services and for civil posts;
(b) on the principles to be followed in making appointments to
civil services and posts and in making promotions and transfers from one
service to another and on the suitability of candidates for such
appointments, promotions or transfers;
(c) on all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the
Government of India or the Government of a State in a civil capacity,
including memorials or petitions relating to such matters;
(d) on any claim by or in respect of a person who is serving or
has served under the Government of India or the Government of a State
or under the Crown in India or under the Government of an Indian State,
in a civil capacity, that any costs incurred by him in defending legal
proceedings instituted against him in respect of acts done or purporting
to be done in the execution of his duty should be paid out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, or, as the case may be, out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State;
(e) on any claim for the award of a pension in respect of injuries
sustained by a person while serving under the Government of India or
the Government of a State or under the Crown in India or under the
Government of an Indian State, in a civil capacity, and any question as to
the amount of any such award,
and it shall be the duty of a Public Service Commission to advise on any matter
so referred to them and on any other matter which the President, or, as the case
may be, the Governor 1
*** of the State, may refer to them:
Provided that the President as respects the all-India services and also as
respects other services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union,
and the Governor 2
***, as respects other services and posts in connection with
the affairs of a State, may make regulations specifying the matters in which
either generally, or in any particular class of case or in any particular
circumstances, it shall not be necessary for a Public Service Commission to be
consulted.
(4) Nothing in clause (3) shall require a Public Service Commission to
be consulted as respects the manner in which any provision referred to in
clause (4) of article 16 may be made or as respects the manner in which effect
may be given to the provisions of article 335. ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh, as the case may be" omitted by s. 29 and Sch. ibid.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)
182
(5) All regulations made under the proviso to clause (3) by the President
or the Governor 1
*** of a State shall be laid for not less than fourteen days
before each House of Parliament or the House or each House of the Legislature
of the State, as the case may be, as soon as possible after they are made, and
shall be subject to such modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment,
as both Houses of Parliament or the House or both Houses of the Legislature of
the State may make during the session in which they are so laid.
321. Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions.—An
Act made by Parliament or, as the case may be, the Legislature of a State may
provide for the exercise of additional functions by the Union Public Service
Commission or the State Public Service Commission as respects the services of
the Union or the State and also as respects the services of any local authority or
other body corporate constituted by law or of any public institution.
322. Expenses of Public Service Commissions.—The expenses of the
Union or a State Public Service Commission, including any salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the members or staff of the
Commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or, as the case
may be, the Consolidated Fund of the State.
323. Reports of Public Service Commissions.—(1) It shall be the duty
of the Union Commission to present annually to the President a report as to the
work done by the Commission and on receipt of such report the President shall
cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the
cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the
reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(2) It shall be the duty of a State Commission to present annually to the
Governor 1
*** of the State a report as to the work done by the Commission,
and it shall be the duty of a Joint Commission to present annually to the
Governor 1
*** of each of the States the needs of which are served by the Joint
Commission a report as to the work done by the Commission in relation to that
State, and in either case the Governor 2
***, shall, on receipt of such report,
cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the
cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the
reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before the Legislature of the State. ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh, as the case may be" omitted by s. 29 and Sch. ibid.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
183
1
[PART XIVA
TRIBUNALS
323A. Administrative tribunals.—(1) Parliament may, by law, provide
for the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes and
complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons
appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the
Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of
India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation
owned or controlled by the Government.
(2) A law made under clause (1) may—(a) provide for the establishment of an administrative tribunal for the
Union and a separate administrative tribunal for each State or for two or
more States;
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for
contempt) and authority which may be exercised by each of the said
tribunals;
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation
and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals;
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court under article 136, with respect to the disputes or
complaints referred to in clause (1);
(e) provide for the transfer to each such administrative tribunal of any
cases pending before any court or other authority immediately before the
establishment of such tribunal as would have been within the jurisdiction
of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or
proceedings are based had arisen after such establishment;
(f) repeal or amend any order made by the President under clause (3)
of article 371D;
(g) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential
provisions (including provisions as to fees) as Parliament may deem
necessary for the effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal of
cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 46 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIVA.—Tribunals)
184
(3) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding
anything in any other provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the
time being in force.
323B. Tribunals for other matters.—(1) The appropriate Legislature
may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by tribunals of any disputes,
complaints, or offences with respect to all or any of the matters specified in
clause (2) with respect to which such Legislature has power to make laws.
(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are the following, namely:—(a) levy, assessment, collection and enforcement of any tax;
(b) foreign exchange, import and export across customs frontiers;
(c) industrial and labour disputes;
(d) land reforms by way of acquisition by the State of any estate as
defined in article 31A or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or
modification of any such rights or by way of ceiling on agricultural land
or in any other way;
(e) ceiling on urban property;
(f) elections to either House of Parliament or the House or either
House of the Legislature of a State, but excluding the matters referred to
in article 329 and article 329A;
(g) production, procurement, supply and distribution of food-stuffs
(including edible oilseeds and oils) and such other goods as the President
may, by public notification, declare to be essential goods for the purpose
of this article and control of prices of such goods; 1
[(h) rent, its regulation and control and tenancy issues including the
right, title and interest of landlords and tenants;] 2
[(i)] offences against laws with respect to any of the matters
specified in sub-clauses (a) to 3
[(h)] and fees in respect of any of those
matters; ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
2. Sub-clause (h) re-lettered as sub-clause (i) by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the brackets and letter “(g)” (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIVA.—Tribunals)
185
1
[(j)] any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in
sub-clauses (a) to 2
[(i)].
(3) A law made under clause (1) may—(a) provide for the establishment of a hierarchy of tribunals;
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for
contempt) and authority which may be exercised by each of the said
tribunals;
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation
and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals;
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court under article 136, with respect to all or any of the matters
falling within the jurisdiction of the said tribunals;
(e) provide for the transfer to each such tribunal of any cases pending
before any court or any other authority immediately before the
establishment of such tribunal as would have been within the jurisdiction
of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or
proceedings are based had arisen after such establishment;
(f) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential
provisions (including provisions as to fees) as the appropriate
Legislature may deem necessary for the effective functioning of, and for
the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of,
such tribunals.
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding
anything in any other provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the
time being in force.
Explanation.—In this article, “appropriate Legislature”, in relation to any
matter, means Parliament or, as the case may be, a State Legislature competent
to make laws with respect to such matter in accordance with the provisions of
Part XI.] ______________________________________________
1. Sub-clause (i) re-lettered as sub-clause (j) by the Constitution (Seventy-fifth
Amendment) Act, 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid, for “(h)” (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
186
PART XV
ELECTIONS
324. Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested
in an Election Commission.—(1) The superintendence, direction and control
of the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to
Parliament and to the Legislature of every State and of elections to the offices
of President and Vice-President held under this Constitution 1
*** shall be
vested in a Commission (referred to in this Constitution as the Election
Commission).
(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election
Commissioner and such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the
President may from time to time fix and the appointment of the Chief Election
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions
of any law made in that behalf by Parliament, be made by the President.
(3) When any other Election Commissioner is so appointed the Chief
Election Commissioner shall act as the Chairman of the Election Commission.
(4) Before each general election to the House of the People and to the
Legislative Assembly of each State, and before the first general election and
thereafter before each biennial election to the Legislative Council of each State
having such Council, the President may also appoint after consultation with the
Election Commission such Regional Commissioners as he may consider
necessary to assist the Election Commission in the performance of the
functions conferred on the Commission by clause (1).
(5) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions
of service and tenure of office of the Election Commissioners and the Regional
Commissioners shall be such as the President may by rule determine:
Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner shall not be removed
from his office except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the
Supreme Court and the conditions of service of the Chief Election
Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment: ______________________________________________
1. The words "including the appointment of election tribunals for the decision of doubts
and disputes arising out of or in connection with elections to Parliament and to the
Legislatures of States" omitted by the Constitution (Nineteenth Amendment)
Act, 1966, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-12-1966).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XV.—Elections)
187
Provided further that any other Election Commissioner or a Regional
Commissioner shall not be removed from office except on the recommendation
of the Chief Election Commissioner.
(6) The President, or the Governor 1
*** of a State, shall, when so
requested by the Election Commission, make available to the Election
Commission or to a Regional Commissioner such staff as may be necessary for
the discharge of the functions conferred on the Election Commission by
clause (1).
325. No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be
included in a special, electoral roll on grounds of religion, race, caste or sex.—There shall be one general electoral roll for every territorial constituency
for election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the
Legislature of a State and no person shall be ineligible for inclusion in any such
roll or claim to be included in any special electoral roll for any such
constituency on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them.
326. Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative
Assemblies of States to be on the basis of adult suffrage.—The elections to
the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be
on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who is a citizen of
India and who is not less than 2
[eighteen years] of age on such date as may be
fixed in that behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature
and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by
the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of
mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a
voter at any such election.
327. Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to elections
to Legislatures.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament
may from time to time by law make provision with respect to all matters
relating to, or in connection with, elections to either House of Parliament or to
the House or either House of the Legislature of a State including the
preparation of electoral rolls, the delimitation of constituencies and all other
matters necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses. ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-first Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 2, for "twenty-one
years" (w.e.f. 28-3-1989).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XV.—Elections)
188
328. Power of Legislature of a State to make provision with respect
to elections to such Legislature.—Subject to the provisions of this
Constitution and in so far as provision in that behalf is not made by Parliament,
the Legislature of a State may from time to time by law make provision with
respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, the elections to the
House or either House of the Legislature of the State including the preparation
of electoral rolls and all other matters necessary for securing the due
constitution of such House or Houses.
329. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—1
[Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution 2
***—]
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or
purporting to be made under article 327 or article 328, shall not be called
in question in any court;
(b) no election to either House of Parliament or to the House or
either House of the Legislature of a State shall be called in question
except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such
manner as may be provided for by or under any law made by the
appropriate Legislature. 3
329A. [Special provision as to elections to Parliament in the case of
Prime Minister and Speaker.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 36 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3, for certain words
(w.e.f. 10-8-1975).
2. The words, figures and letter "but subject to the provisions of article 329A" omitted by
the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 4 (w.e.f. 10-8-1975).
189
PART XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES
330. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in the House of the People.—(1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the
People for —
(a) the Scheduled Castes; 1
[(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the
autonomous districts of Assam; and]
(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam.
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State 2
[or Union territory] for
the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats allotted to
that State 2
[or Union territory] in the House of the People as the population of
the Scheduled Castes in the State 2
[or Union territory] or of the Scheduled
Tribes in the State 2
[or Union territory] or part of the State 2
[or Union territory],
as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total
population of the State 2
[or Union territory]. 3
[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (2), the number of
seats reserved in the House of the People for the Scheduled Tribes in the
autonomous districts of Assam shall bear to the total number of seats allotted to
that State a proportion not less than the population of the Scheduled Tribes in
the said autonomous districts bears to the total population of the State.] 4
[Explanation.—In this article and in article 332, the expression
“population” means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census
of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding
census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the
relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 5
[2026] have been
published, be construed as a reference to the 6
[2001] census.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. By the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for sub-clause (b)
(w.e.f. 16-6-1986).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 17-10-1973).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 47 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 6, for "2000" (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
6. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5, for "1991" (w.e.f. 22-6-2003).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
190
1
[330A. Reservation of seats for women in the House of the People.-
(1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People.
(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved
under clause (2) of article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of seats
reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election to the House
of the People shall be reserved for women.]
331. Representation of the Anglo-Indian Community in the House of
the People.—Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the President may, if he is
of opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in
the House of the People, nominate not more than two members of that
community to the House of the People.
332. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, 2
[except the Scheduled Tribes
in the autonomous districts of Assam], in the Legislative Assembly of every
State 3
***.
(2) Seats shall be reserved also for the autonomous districts in the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam.
(3) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State under clause (1)
shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats
in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the
Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, as the case may be, in respect
of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State. 4
[(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the taking
effect, under article 170, of the re-adjustment, on the basis of the first census
after the year 5
[2026], of the number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies of
the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland, the seats
which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly
of any such State shall be,—
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023, s.3 (date yet to be
notified).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 16-6-1986).
3. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-9-1987).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 7, for "2000" (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
191
(a) if all the seats in the Legislative Assembly of such State in
existence on the date of coming into force of the Constitution (Fiftyseventh Amendment) Act, 1987 (hereafter in this clause referred to as
the existing Assembly) are held by members of the Scheduled Tribes, all
the seats except one;
(b) in any other case, such number of seats as bears to the total
number of seats, a proportion not less than the number (as on the said
date) of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the existing
Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the existing Assembly.] 1
[(3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the
re-adjustment, under article 170, takes effect on the basis of the first census
after the year 2
[2026], of the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Tripura, the seats which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in
the Legislative Assembly shall be, such number of seats as bears to the total
number of seats, a proportion not less than the number, as on the date of
coming into force of the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992,
of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly in
existence on the said date bears to the total number of seats in that Assembly.]
(4) The number of seats reserved for an autonomous district in the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam shall bear to the total number of
seats in that Assembly a proportion not less than the population of the district
bears to the total population of the State.
(5) The constituencies for the seats reserved for any autonomous district
of Assam shall not comprise any area outside that district 3
***.
(6) No person who is not a member of a Scheduled Tribe of any
autonomous district of the State of Assam shall be eligible for election to the
Legislative Assembly of the State from any constituency of that district 3
***: 4
[Provided that for elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State of ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitition (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5-12-1992).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 7, for "2000"
(w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
3. Certain words omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971),
s. 71 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninetieth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-9-2003).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
192
Assam, the representation of the Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes in
the constituencies included in the Bodoland Territorial Areas District, so
notified, and existing prior to the constitution of Bodoland Territorial Areas
District, shall be maintained.] 1
[332A. Reservation of seats for women in the Legislative
Assemblies of the States.— (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the
Legislative Assembly of every State.
(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved
under clause (3) of article 332 shall be reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) As nearly as may be , one-third (including the number of seats
reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Sceduled
Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in the
Legislative Assembly of every State shall be reserved for women.]
333. Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the
Legislative Assemblies of the States.—Notwithstanding anything in article
170, the Governor 2
*** of a State may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian
community needs representation in the Legislative Assembly of the State and is
not adequately represented therein, 3
[nominate one member of that community
to the Assembly].
334. 4
[Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after
certain period].—Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this
Part, the provisions of this Constitution relating to—(a) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and in the Legislative
Assemblies of the States; and
(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the
House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by
nomination, ______________________________________________
1.Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023, s.4 (date yet to be
notified).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,
s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-third Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 4, for "nominate such
number of members of the community to the Assembly as he considers appropriate"
(w.e.f. 23-1-1970). 4. Subs. by the Constitution (One hundred and fourth Amendment) Act, 2019, s. 2, for
marginal heading (w.e.f. 25-1-2020).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
193
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of 1
[eighty years in respect of clause (a) and seventy years in respect of clause (b)] from the commencement of this Constitution:
Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the then existing House or Assembly, as the case may be. 2
[334A. Reservation of seats for women take effect. — (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provision of this Part or Part VIII, the provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall come into effect after an exercise of delimitation is undertaken for this purpose after the relevant figures for the first census taken after commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023 have been published and shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of fifteen years from such commencement. (2) Subject to the provisions of articles 239AA, 330A and 332A, seats reserved for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall continue till such date as the Parliament may by law determine. (3) Rotation of seats reserved for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall take effect after each subsequent exercise of delimitation as the Parliament may by law determine. (4) Nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the then existing House of the People, Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.] 335. Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services
and posts.—The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State: ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Fourth Amendment) Act, 2019, s. 2, for
“seventy years” (w.e.f. 25-1-2020). The words “seventy years” subs. for “sixty years” by
the Constitution (Ninety-fifth Amendment) Act, 2009, s.2 (w.e.f. 25-1-2010). The words
“sixty years” subs. for “fifty years” by the Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Act,
1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-1-2000). The words “fifty years” subs. for “forty years” by the
Constitution (Sixty-second Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-12-1989). The words
“forty years” subs. for “thirty years” by the Constitution (Forty-fifth Amendment) Act,
1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-1-1980).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023, s.5 (date yet
to be notified).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
194
1
[Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent in making of any
provision in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes for relaxation in qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the
standards of evaluation, for reservation in matters or promotion to any class or
classes of services or posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.]
336. Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain
services.—(1) During the first two years after the commencement of this
Constitution, appointments of members of the Anglo-Indian community to posts
in the railway, customs, postal and telegraph services of the Union shall be made
on the same basis as immediately before the fifteenth day of August, 1947.
During every succeeding period of two years, the number of posts
reserved for the members of the said community in the said services shall, as
nearly as possible, be less by ten per cent. than the numbers so reserved during
the immediately preceding period of two years:
Provided that at the end of ten years from the commencement of this
Constitution all such reservations shall cease.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall bar the appointment of members of the
Anglo-Indian community to posts other than, or in addition to, those reserved
for the community under that clause if such members are found qualified for
appointment on merit as compared with the members of other communities.
337. Special provision with respect to educational grants for the
benefit of Anglo-Indian community.—During the first three financial years
after the commencement of this Constitution, the same grants, if any, shall be
made by the Union and by each State 2
*** for the benefit of the Anglo-Indian
community in respect of education as were made in the financial year ending
on the thirty-first day of March, 1948.
During every succeeding period of three years the grants may be less by
ten per cent. than those for the immediately preceding period of three years:
Provided that at the end of ten years from the commencement of this
Constitution such grants, to the extent to which they are a special concession to
the Anglo-Indian community, shall cease:
Provided further that no educational institution shall be entitled to
receive any grant under this article unless at least forty per cent. of the annual
admissions therein are made available to members of communities other than
the Anglo-Indian community. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-second Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-9-2000).
2. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
195
 338. 1
[National Commission for Scheduled Castes].—2
[3
[(1) There
shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the National
Commission for the Scheduled Castes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be
such as the President may by rule determine.]
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards
provided for the Scheduled Castes 4
*** under this Constitution or under
any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the
Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the
deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Castes 4
***;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of
socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes 1
*** and to
evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any
State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for the marginal
heading (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2, for cls. (1) and (2)
(w.e.f. 12-3-1992).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for cls. (1) and
(2) (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
4. The words "and Scheduled Tribes" omitted by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth
Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
196
those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes 1
***; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Castes 1
*** as the President
may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify. (6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations. (7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations. (8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:—(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath; (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; c) receiving evidence on affidavits; d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office; (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; (f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine. (9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes 1
***]. 2
[(10)] In this article, references to the Scheduled Castes 1
*** shall be
construed as including references 3
*** to the Anglo-Indian community. 4
[338A. National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.—(1) There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Tribes to be known as the National
Commission for the Scheduled Tribes. ______________________________________________
1. The words "and Scheduled Tribes" omitted by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth
Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
2. Cl. (3) renumbered as cl. (10) by the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990,
s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-3-1992).
3. The words, brackets and figures "to such other backward classes as the President may,
on receipt of the report of a Commission appointed under cl. (1) of article 340, by
order specify and also" omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second
Amendment) Act, 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-8-2018).
4. Art 338A ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3
(w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
197
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be
such as the President may by rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the
safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes under this Constitution or
under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the
Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the
deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Tribes;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of
socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes and to evaluate the
progress of their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as
the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those
safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the
measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the
effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures
for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Tribes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection,
welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as
the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter
with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be
forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
198
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in
sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in
respect of the following matters, namely:—(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the
Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Tribes.] 1
[338B. National Commission for Backward Classes.—(1) There shall
be a Commission for the socially and educationally backward classes to be
known as the National Commission for Backward Classes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be
such as the President may by rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and
seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards
provided for the socially and educationally backward classes under this
Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under
any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such
safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the
deprivation of rights and safeguards of the socially and educationally
backward classes;
(c) to participate and advise on the socio-economic development
of the socially and educationally backward classes and to evaluate the
progress of their development under the Union and any State; ______________________________________________
1.Art 338B ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018,
s. 3 (w.e.f. 15-8-2018).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
199
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as
the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those
safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports the recommendations as to the
measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective
implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the
protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the socially and
educationally backward classes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection,
welfare and development and advancement of the socially and
educationally backward classes as the President may, subject to the
provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with
which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be
forwarded to the State Government which shall cause it to be laid before the
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in
sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in
respect of the following matters, namely :—(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the
Commission on all major policy matters affecting the socially and
educationally backward classes:]
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
200
1
[Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply for the purposes of
clause (3) of article 342A.]
339. Control of the Union over the administration of Scheduled
Areas and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes.—(1) The President may at any
time and shall, at the expiration of ten years from the commencement of this
Constitution by order appoint a Commission to report on the administration of
the Scheduled Areas and the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the States 2
***.
The order may define the composition, powers and procedure of the
Commission and may contain such incidental or ancillary provisions as the
President may consider necessary or desirable.
(2) The executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of
directions to 3
[a State] as to the drawing up and execution of schemes specified
in the direction to be essential for the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the
State.
340. Appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of
backward classes.—(1) The President may by order appoint a Commission
consisting of such persons as he thinks fit to investigate the conditions of
socially and educationally backward classes within the territory of India and the
difficulties under which they labour and to make recommendations as to the
steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove such difficulties
and to improve their condition and as to the grants that should be made for the
purpose by the Union or any State and the conditions subject to which such
grants should be made, and the order appointing such Commission shall define
the procedure to be followed by the Commission.
(2) A Commission so appointed shall investigate the matters referred to
them and present to the President a report setting out the facts as found by them
and making such recommendations as they think proper.
(3) The President shall cause a copy of the report so presented together
with a memorandum explaining the action taken thereon to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
341. Scheduled Castes.—(1) The President 4
[may with respect to any
State 5
[or Union territory], and where it is a State 2
***, after consultation with ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Fifth Amendment) Act, 2021, s. 2
(w.e.f. 15-9-2021).
2. The words and letters for "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch. ibid. for "any such State" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 10, for "may, after
consultation with the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State" (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
201
the Governor 1
*** thereof], by public notification2
, specify the castes, races or
tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to
that State 3
[or Union territory, as the case may be.]
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification. 342. Scheduled Tribes.—(1) The President 4
[may with respect to any State 3
[or Union territory], and where it is a State 45
***, after consultation with the Governor 31
*** thereof], by public notification6
,5
specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State 3
[or Union territory, as the case may be.]
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of
Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any tribe or
tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but
save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied
by any subsequent notification. ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. See the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 (C.O. 19), the Constitution
(Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 (C.O. 32), the Constitution
(Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Castes Order, 1956 (C.O. 52), the Constitution
(Dadra and Nagar Haveli) (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1962 (C.O. 64), the Constitution
(Pondicherry) Scheduled Castes Order, 1964 (C.O. 68), the Constitution (Goa, Daman
and Diu) Scheduled Castes Order, 1968 (C.O. 81) and the Constitution (Sikkim)
Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 (C.O. 110).
3. Ins. by the Constitutiton (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 11, for "may, after
consultation with the Governor or Rajpramukh of State" (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
5. Certain words Omitted by the constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and
Sch., ibid, (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
6. See the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 (C.O. 22), the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 (C.O. 33), the Constitution
(Andaman and Nicobar Islands) (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1959 (C.O. 58), the
Constitution (Dadra and Nagar Haveli) (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1962 (C.O. 65), the
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1967 (C.O. 78), the
Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1968 (C.O. 82), the
Constitution (Nagaland) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1970 (C.O. 88) the Constitution
(Sikkim) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1978 (C.O. 111).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes)
202
1
[342A. Socially and educationally backward classes.—(1) The
President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a
State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification,
specify 2
[the socially and educationally backward classes in the Central List
which shall for the purposes of the Central Government] be deemed to be
socially and educationally backward classes in relation to that State or Union
territory, as the case may be.
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the Central List of
socially and educationally backward classes specified in a notification issued
under clause (1) any socially and educationally backward class, but save as
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any
subsequent notification.] 3
[Explanation.—For the purposes of clauses (1) and (2), the expression
“Central List” means the list of socially and educationally backward classes
prepared and maintained by and for the Central Government.
(3) Notwithstanding any contained in clauses (1) and (2), every State or
Union territory may, by law, prepare and maintain, for its own purposes, a list
of socially and educationally backward classes, entries in which may be
different from the Central List.]
______________________________________________
1. Art 342 A ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018,
s. 4 (w.e.f. 15-8-2018).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Fifth Amendment) Act, 2021, s. 3 for
socially and educationally backward classes which shall for the purposes of the
Constitution (w.e.f. 15-9-2021).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Fifth Amendment) Act, 2021, s. 3
(w.e.f. 15-9-2021).
203
PART XVII
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
CHAPTER I.—LANGUAGE OF THE UNION
343. Official language of the Union.—(1) The official language of the
Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script.
The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union
shall be the international form of Indian numerals.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for a period of fifteen years
from the commencement of this Constitution, the English language shall
continue to be used for all the official purposes of the Union for which it was
being used immediately before such commencement:
Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order1
authorise the use of the Hindi language in addition to the English language and
of the Devanagari form of numerals in addition to the international form of
Indian numerals for any of the official purposes of the Union.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may by law
provide for the use, after the said period of fifteen years, of—(a) the English language; or
(b) the Devanagari form of numerals,
for such purposes as may be specified in the law.
344. Commission and Committee of Parliament on official
language.—(1) The President shall, at the expiration of five years from the
commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years
from such commencement, by order constitute a Commission which shall
consist of a Chairman and such other members representing the different
languages specified in the Eighth Schedule as the President may appoint, and
the order shall define the procedure to be followed by the Commission.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to
the President as to—
(a) the progressive use of the Hindi language for the official
purposes of the Union;
(b) restrictions on the use of the English language for all or any of
the official purposes of the Union;
(c) the language to be used for all or any of the purposes
mentioned in article 348; ______________________________________________
1. See C.O. 41.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVII—LANGUAGE)
204
(d) the form of numerals to be used for any one or more specified
purposes of the Union;
(e) any other matter referred to the Commission by the President
as regards the official language of the Union and the language for
communication between the Union and a State or between one State and
another and their use.
(3) In making their recommendations under clause (2), the Commission
shall have due regard to the industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of
India, and the just claims and the interests of persons belonging to the
non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public services.
(4) There shall be constituted a Committee consisting of thirty members,
of whom twenty shall be members of the House of the People and ten shall be
members of the Council of States to be elected respectively by the members of
the House of the People and the members of the Council of States in
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the
single transferable vote.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Committee to examine the
recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (1) and to report
to the President their opinion thereon.
(6) Notwithstanding anything in article 343, the President may, after
consideration of the report referred to in clause (5), issue directions in
accordance with the whole or any part of that report.
CHAPTER II.—REGIONAL LANGUAGES
345. Official language or languages of a State.—Subject to the
provisions of articles 346 and 347, the Legislature of a State may by law adopt
any one or more of the languages in use in the State or Hindi as the language or
languages to be used for all or any of the official purposes of that State:
Provided that, until the Legislature of the State otherwise provides by
law, the English language shall continue to be used for those official purposes
within the State for which it was being used immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution.
346. Official language for communication between one State and
another or between a State and the Union.—The language for the time being
authorised for use in the Union for official purposes shall be the official
language for communication between one State and another State and between
a State and the Union:
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVII—LANGUAGE)
205
Provided that if two or more States agree that the Hindi language should
be the official language for communication between such States, that language
may be used for such communication.
347. Special provision relating to language spoken by a section of the
population of a State.—On a demand being made in that behalf the President
may, if he is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of a State
desire the use of any language spoken by them to be recognised by that State,
direct that such language shall also be officially recognised throughout that
State or any part thereof for such purpose as he may specify.
CHAPTER III.—LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT, HIGH COURTS, ETC. 348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High
Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the
foregoing provisions of this Part, until Parliament by law otherwise provides—(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court;
(b) the authoritative texts—(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be
moved in either House of Parliament or in the House or either
House of the Legislature of a State;
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a
State and of all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the
Governor 1
*** of a State; and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued
under this Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or
the Legislature of a State,
shall be in the English language.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the
Governor 1
*** of a State may, with the previous consent of the President,
authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for any
official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court having its
principal seat in that State: ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVII—LANGUAGE)
206
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any judgment, decree
or order passed or made by such High Court.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), where the
Legislature of a State has prescribed any language other than the English
language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislature of the
State or in Ordinances promulgated by the Governor 1
*** of the State or in any
order, rule, regulation or bye-law referred to in paragraph (iii) of that sub-clause,
a translation of the same in the English language published under the authority of
the Governor 1
*** of the State in the Official Gazette of that State shall be
deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in the English language under this
article.
349. Special procedure for enactment of certain laws relating to
language.—During the period of fifteen years from the commencement of this
Constitution, no Bill or amendment making provision for the language to be
used for any of the purposes mentioned in clause (1) of article 348 shall be
introduced or moved in either House of Parliament without the previous
sanction of the President, and the President shall not give his sanction to the
introduction of any such Bill or the moving of any such amendment except
after he has taken into consideration the recommendations of the Commission
constituted under clause (1) of article 344 and the report of the Committee
constituted under clause (4) of that article.
CHAPTER IV.—SPECIAL DIRECTIVES
350. Language to be used in representations for redress of
grievances.—Every person shall be entitled to submit a representation for the
redress of any grievance to any officer or authority of the Union or a State in
any of the languages used in the Union or in the State, as the case may be. 2
[350A. Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary
stage.—It shall be the endeavour of every State and of every local authority
within the State to provide adequate facilities for instruction in the
mother-tongue at the primary stage of education to children belonging to
linguistic minority groups; and the President may issue such directions to any
State as he considers necessary or proper for securing the provision of such
facilities. ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Arts. 350A and 350B ins. by s.21., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVII—LANGUAGE)
207
350B. Special Officer for linguistic minorities.—(1) There shall be a
Special Officer for linguistic minorities to be appointed by the President.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Special Officer to investigate all matters relating
to the safeguards provided for linguistic minorities under this Constitution and
report to the President upon those matters at such intervals as the President may
direct, and the President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of
Parliament, and sent to the Governments of the States concerned.]
351. Directive for development of the Hindi language.—It shall be the
duty of the Union to promote the spread of the Hindi language, to develop it so
that it may serve as a medium of expression for all the elements of the
composite culture of India and to secure its enrichment by assimilating without
interfering with its genius, the forms, style and expressions used in Hindustani
and in the other languages of India specified in the Eighth Schedule, and by
drawing, wherever necessary or desirable, for its vocabulary, primarily on
Sanskrit and secondarily on other languages. 
208
PART XVIII
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
352. Proclamation of Emergency.—(1) If the President is satisfied that
a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India or of any part of the
territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external aggression or 1
[armed
rebellion], he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect 2
[in
respect of the whole of India or of such part of the territory thereof as may be
specified in the Proclamation.] 3
[Explanation.—A Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the
security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by
external aggression or by armed rebellion may be made before the actual
occurrence of war or of any such aggression or rebellion, if the President is
satisfied that there is imminent danger thereof.] 4
[(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1) may be varied or revoked
by a subsequent Proclamation.
(3) The President shall not issue a Proclamation under clause (1) or a
Proclamation varying such Proclamation unless the decision of the Union
Cabinet (that is to say, the Council consisting of the Prime Minister and other
Ministers of Cabinet rank appointed under article 75) that such a Proclamation
may be issued has been communicated to him in writing.
(4) Every Proclamation issued under this article shall be laid before each
House of Parliament and shall, except where it is a Proclamation revoking a
previous Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of one month unless
before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both
Houses of Parliament: ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37, for "internal
disturbance" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 48 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
4. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for cls. (2), (2A) and (3) (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
209
Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation
revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued at a time when the House of the
People has been dissolved, or the dissolution of the House of the People takes
place during the period of one month referred to in this clause, and if a
resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by the Council of
States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been passed by
the House of the People before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation
shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the
House of the People first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the
Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.
(5) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate
on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of the passing of the
second of the resolutions approving the Proclamation under clause (4):
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in
force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parliament the
Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a further period of six
months from the date on which it would otherwise have ceased to operate under
this clause:
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People takes
place during any such period of six months and a resolution approving the
continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the Council of
States but no resolution with respect to the continuance in force of such
Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People during the said
period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days
from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution
unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days, a resolution
approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation has been also passed
by the House of the People.
(6) For the purposes of clauses (4) and (5), a resolution may be passed
by either House of Parliament only by a majority of the total membership of
that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members of that
House present and voting.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing clauses, the
President shall revoke a Proclamation issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation
varying such Proclamation if the House of the People passes a resolution
disapproving, or, as the case may be, disapproving the continuance in force of,
such Proclamation.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
210
(8) Where a notice in writing signed by not less than one-tenth of the
total number of members of the House of the People has been given, of their
intention to move a resolution for disapproving, or, as the case may be, for
disapproving the continuance in force of, a Proclamation issued under
clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation,—(a) to the Speaker, if the House is in session; or
(b) to the President, if the House is not in session,
a special sitting of the House shall be held within fourteen days from the date
on which such notice is received by the Speaker, or, as the case may be, by the
President, for the purpose of considering such resolution.] 1
[(9) The power conferred on the President by this article shall include
the power to issue different Proclamations on different grounds, being war or
external aggression or 2
[armed rebellion] or imminent danger of war or external
aggression or 2
[armed rebellion], whether or not there is a Proclamation
already issued by the President under clause (1) and such Proclamation is in
operation. 1
* * * * * * * *
353. Effect of Proclamation of Emergency.—While a Proclamation
of Emergency is in operation, then—(a) notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the executive
power of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to any State
as to the manner in which the executive power thereof is to be
exercised;
(b) the power of Parliament to make laws with respect to any
matter shall include power to make laws conferring powers and
imposing duties, or authorising the conferring of powers and the
imposition of duties, upon the Union or officers and authorities of the
Union as respects that matter, notwithstanding that it is one which is not
enumerated in the Union List: ______________________________________________
1. Cls. (4) and (5) ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (with
retrospective effect) and subsequently cl. (4) renumbered as cl. (9) and cl. (5) omitted by
the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid. for "internal disturbance" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
211
1
[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only
in any part of the territory of India,—(i) the executive power of the Union to give directions under
clause (a), and
(ii) the power of Parliament to make laws under clause (b),
shall also extend to any State other than a State in which or in any part of
which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation if and in so far as the
security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in
or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of
Emergency is in operation.]
354. Application of provisions relating to distribution of revenues
while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.—(1) The President
may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, by order direct that
all or any of the provisions of articles 268 to 279 shall for such period, not
extending in any case beyond the expiration of the financial year in which such
Proclamation ceases to operate, as may be specified in the order, have effect
subject to such exceptions or modifications as he thinks fit.
(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
355. Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression
and internal disturbance.—It shall be the duty of the Union to protect every
State against external aggression and internal disturbance and to ensure that the
Government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of
this Constitution.
356. Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in
States.—(1) If the President, on receipt of a report from the Governor 2
*** of a
State or otherwise, is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the
Government of the State cannot be carried on in accordance with the
provisions of this Constitution, the President may by Proclamation—______________________________________________
1. Added by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 49
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
212
(a) assume to himself all or any of the functions of the
Government of the State and all or any of the powers vested in or
exercisable by the Governor 1
*** or any body or authority in the State
other than the Legislature of the State;
(b) declare that the powers of the Legislature of the State shall be
exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament;
(c) make such incidental and consequential provisions as appear
to the President to be necessary or desirable for giving effect to the
objects of the Proclamation, including provisions for suspending in
whole or in part the operation of any provisions of this Constitution
relating to any body or authority in the State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall authorise the President to
assume to himself any of the powers vested in or exercisable by a High Court,
or to suspend in whole or in part the operation of any provision of this
Constitution relating to High Courts.
(2) Any such Proclamation may be revoked or varied by a subsequent
Proclamation.
(3) Every Proclamation under this article shall be laid before each House
of Parliament and shall, except where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous
Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of two months unless before
the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses
of Parliament:
Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation
revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued at a time when the House of the
People is dissolved or the dissolution of the House of the People takes place
during the period of two months referred to in this clause, and if a resolution
approving the Proclamation has been passed by the Council of States, but no
resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the House of
the People before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to
operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said
period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also
passed by the House of the People. ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh, as the case may be" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
213
(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate
on the expiration of a period of 1
[six months from the date of issue of the
Proclamation]:
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in
force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parliament, the
Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a further period of 2
[six months] from the date on which under this clause it would otherwise have
ceased to operate, but no such Proclamation shall in any case remain in force
for more than three years:
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People takes
place during any such period of 2
[six months] and a resolution approving the
continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the Council of
States, but no resolution with respect to the continuance in force of such
Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People during the said
period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days
from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution
unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution
approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation has been also passed
by the House of the People: 3
[Provided also that in the case of the Proclamation issued under
clause (1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab, the
reference in the first proviso to this clause to “three years” shall be construed
as a reference to 4
[five years].] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 50, for "six months"
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 38, for "one year from the date of the passing of the second of the resolutions
approving the Proclamation under clause (3)" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by s. 50, ibid., for "six months" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by s. 38, ibid., for "one year", respectively (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-4-1990).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 4-10-1990)
and further subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1991, s. 2
(w.e.f. 12-3-1991).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
214
1
[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4), a resolution with
respect to the continuance in force of a Proclamation approved under clause (3)
for any period beyond the expiration of one year from the date of issue of such
Proclamation shall not be passed by either House of Parliament unless—
(a) a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, in the whole of
India or, as the case may be, in the whole or any part of the State, at the
time of the passing of such resolution, and
(b) the Election Commission certifies that the continuance in force
of the Proclamation approved under clause (3) during the period
specified in such resolution is necessary on account of difficulties in
holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State
concerned:] 2
[Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the Proclamation
issued under clause (1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State
of Punjab.]
357. Exercise of legislative powers under Proclamation issued under
article 356.—(1) Where by a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of
article 356, it has been declared that the powers of the Legislature of the State
shall be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, it shall be
competent—
(a) for Parliament to confer on the President the power of the
Legislature of the State to make laws, and to authorise the President to
delegate, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose, the
power so conferred to any other authority to be specified by him in that
behalf;
(b) for Parliament, or for the President or other authority in whom
such power to make laws is vested under sub-clause (a), to make laws
conferring powers and imposing duties, or authorising the conferring of
powers and the imposition of duties, upon the Union or officers and
authorities thereof;
(c) for the President to authorise when the House of the People is
not in session expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State
pending the sanction of such expenditure by Parliament. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 6 (with retrospective
effect) and subsequently subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 38, for cl. (5) (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Proviso omitted by the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 2
(w.e.f. 6-1-1990) and subsequently ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-4-1990).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
215
1
[(2) Any law made in exercise of the power of the Legislature of the
State by Parliament or the President or other authority referred to in
sub-clause (a) of clause (1) which Parliament or the President or such other
authority would not, but for the issue of a Proclamation under article 356, have
been competent to make shall, after the Proclamation has ceased to operate,
continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by a competent
Legislature or other authority.]
358. Suspension of provisions of article 19 during emergencies.—2
[(1)] 3
[While a Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the security of India
or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by external
aggression is in operation], nothing in article 19 shall restrict the power of the
State as defined in Part III to make any law or to take any executive action
which the State would but for the provisions contained in that Part be
competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the
incompetency, cease to have effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to
operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so
ceases to have effect: 4
[Provided that 5
[where such Proclamation of Emergency] is in operation
only in any part of the territory of India, any such law may be made, or any
such executive action may be taken, under this article in relation to or in any
State or Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of
Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any
part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part
of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in
operation.] 6
[(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply—______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 51 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Art. 358 re-numbered as cl. (1) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Subs. by s. 39, ibid, for "While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation"
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
4. Added by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 52
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 39, for "where a
Proclamation of Emergency" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
6. Ins. by s. 39, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
216
(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that
such law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation
when it is made; or
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law
containing such a recital.]
359. Suspension of the enforcement of the rights conferred by
Part III during emergencies.—(1) Where a Proclamation of Emergency is in
operation, the President may by order declare that the right to move any court
for the enforcement of such of 1
[the rights conferred by Part III (except articles
20 and 21)] as may be mentioned in the order and all proceedings pending in
any court for the enforcement of the rights so mentioned shall remain
suspended for the period during which the Proclamation is in force or for such
shorter period as may be specified in the order. 2
[(1A) While an order made under clause (1) mentioning any of 1
[the
rights conferred by Part III (except articles 20 and 21)] is in operation, nothing
in that Part conferring those rights shall restrict the power of the State as
defined in the said Part to make any law or to take any executive action which
the State would but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to
make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the incompetency,
cease to have effect as soon as the order aforesaid ceases to operate, except as
respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have
effect:]3
[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only
in any part of the territory of India, any such law may be made, or any such
executive action may be taken, under this article in relation to or in any State or
Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of
Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any
part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part
of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in
operation.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 40, for "the rights
conferred by Part III" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 7 (with retrospective
effect).
3. Added by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 53 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
217
1
[(1B) Nothing in clause (1A) shall apply—(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that
such law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation
when it is made; or
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law
containing such a recital.]
(2) An order made as aforesaid may extend to the whole or any part of
the territory of India: 2
[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only
in a part of the territory of India, any such order shall not extend to any other
part of the territory of India unless the President, being satisfied that the
security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in
or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of
Emergency is in operation, considers such extension to be necessary.]
(3) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 3
359A. [Application of this Part to the State of Punjab.].—Omitted by
the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6-1-1990).
360. Provisions as to financial emergency.—(1) If the President is
satisfied that a situation has arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of
India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened, he may by a
Proclamation make a declaration to that effect. 4
[(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1)—(a) may be revoked or varied by a subsequent Proclamation;
(b) shall be laid before each House of Parliament; ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 40 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Added by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 53 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30-3-1988)
and ceased to operate on the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement
of that Act, i.e. 30th day of March, 1988.
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 41, for cl. (2)
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
218
(c) shall cease to operate at the expiration of two months, unless
before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions
of both Houses of Parliament:
Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at a time when the
House of the People has been dissolved or the dissolution of the House of the
People takes place during the period of two months referred to in
sub-clause (c), and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed
by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation
has been passed by the House of the People before the expiration of that period,
the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the
date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless
before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the
Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.]
(3) During the period any such Proclamation as is mentioned in
clause (1) is in operation, the executive authority of the Union shall extend to
the giving of directions to any State to observe such canons of financial
propriety as may be specified in the directions, and to the giving of such other
directions as the President may deem necessary and adequate for the purpose.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution—(a) any such direction may include—(i) a provision requiring the reduction of salaries and allowances
of all or any class of persons serving in connection with the affairs of
a State;
(ii) a provision requiring all Money Bills or other Bills to which
the provisions of article 207 apply to be reserved for the
consideration of the President after they are passed by the Legislature
of the State;
(b) it shall be competent for the President during the period any
Proclamation issued under this article is in operation to issue directions
for the reduction of salaries and allowances of all or any class of persons
serving in connection with the affairs of the Union including the Judges
of the Supreme Court and the High Courts. 1
[(5) * * * * *] ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 8 (with retrospective
effect) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 41
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
219
PART XIX
MISCELLANEOUS
361. Protection of President and Governors and Rajpramukhs.—(1)
The President, or the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State, shall not be
answerable to any court for the exercise and performance of the powers and
duties of his office or for any act done or purporting to be done by him in the
exercise and performance of those powers and duties:
Provided that the conduct of the President may be brought under review
by any court, tribunal or body appointed or designated by either House of
Parliament for the investigation of a charge under article 61:
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall be construed as
restricting the right of any person to bring appropriate proceedings against the
Government of India or the Government of a State.
(2) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall be instituted or continued
against the President, or the Governor 1
*** of a State, in any court during his
term of office.
(3) No process for the arrest or imprisonment of the President, or the
Governor 1
*** of a State, shall issue from any court during his term of office.
(4) No civil proceedings in which relief is claimed against the President,
or the Governor 1
*** of a State, shall be instituted during his term of office in
any court in respect of any act done or purporting to be done by him in his
personal capacity, whether before or after he entered upon his office as
President, or as Governor 1
*** of such State, until the expiration of two months
next after notice in writing has been delivered to the President or the Governor 1
***, as the case may be, or left at his office stating the nature of the
proceedings, the cause of action therefor, the name, description and place of
residence of the party by whom such proceedings are to be instituted and the
relief which he claims. ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
220
1
[361A. Protection of publication of proceedings of Parliament and
State Legislatures.—(1) No person shall be liable to any proceedings, civil or
criminal, in any court in respect of the publication in a newspaper of a
substantially true report of any proceedings of either House of Parliament or the
Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature,
of a State, unless the publication is proved to have been made with malice:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the publication of any
report of the proceedings of a secret sitting of either House of Parliament or the
Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature,
of a State.
(2) Clause (1) shall apply in relation to reports or matters broadcast by
means of wireless telegraphy as part of any programme or service provided by
means of a broadcasting station as it applies in relation to reports or matters
published in a newspaper.
Explanation.—In this article, “newspaper” includes a news agency report
containing material for publication in a newspaper.] 2
[361B. Disqualification for appointment on remunerative political
post.—A member of a House belonging to any political party who is
disqualified for being a member of the House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth
Schedule shall also be disqualified to hold any remunerative political post for
duration of the period commencing from the date of his disqualification till the
date on which the term of his office as such member would expire or till the
date on which he contests an election to a House and is declared elected,
whichever is earlier.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this article,—(a) the expression “House” has the meaning assigned to it in
clause (a) of paragraph 1 of the Tenth Schedule;
(b) the expression “remunerative political post” means any office— (i) under the Government of India or the Government of a
State where the salary or remuneration for such office is paid
out of the public revenue of the Government of India or the
Government of the State, as the case may be; or ______________________________________________
1. Art. 361A ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 42
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Art. 361B ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4
(w.e.f. 1-1-2004).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
221
(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is
wholly or partially owned by the Government of India or the
Government of State, and the salary or remuneration for such
office is paid by such body,
except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.]
362. [Rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States.].—Omitted by the
Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-12-1971). 363. Bar to interference by courts in disputes arising out of certain
treaties, agreements, etc.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution
but subject to the provisions of article 143, neither the Supreme Court nor any
other court shall have jurisdiction in any dispute arising out of any provision of
a treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument
which was entered into or executed before the commencement of this
Constitution by any Ruler of an Indian State and to which the Government of
the Dominion of India or any of its predecessor Governments was a party and
which has or has been continued in operation after such commencement, or in
any dispute in respect of any right accruing under or any liability or obligation
arising out of any of the provisions of this Constitution relating to any such
treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument.
(2) In this article—
(a) “Indian State” means any territory recognised before the
commencement of this Constitution by His Majesty or the Government
of the Dominion of India as being such a State; and
(b) “Ruler” includes the Prince, Chief or other person recognised
before such commencement by His Majesty or the Government of the
Dominion of India as the Ruler of any Indian State. 1
[363A. Recognition granted to Rulers of Indian States to cease and
privy purses to be abolished.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution
or in any law for the time being in force—(a) the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any time before
the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment)
Act, 1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler of an Indian
State or any person who, at any time before such commencement, was
recognised by the President as the successor of such ruler shall, on and
from such commencement, cease to be recognised as such Ruler or the
successor of such Ruler; ______________________________________________
1. Art. 363A ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3
(w.e.f. 28-12-1971).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
222
(b) on and from the commencement of the Constitution (Twentysixth Amendment) Act, 1971, privy purse is abolished and all rights,
liabilities and obligations in respect of privy purse are extinguished and
accordingly the Ruler or, as the case may be, the successor of such
Ruler, referred to in clause (a) or any other person shall not be paid any sum as privy purse.]
364. Special provisions as to major ports and aerodromes.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may by public
notification direct that as from such date as may be specified in the
notification—
(a) any law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of a State
shall not apply to any major port or aerodrome or shall apply thereto
subject to such exceptions or modifications as may be specified in the
notification; or
(b) any existing law shall cease to have effect in any major port or
aerodrome except as respects things done or omitted to be done before
the said date, or shall in its application to such port or aerodrome have
effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as may be specified in
the notification.
(2) In this article—
(a) “major port” means a port declared to be a major port by or
under any law made by Parliament or any existing law and includes all
areas for the time being included within the limits of such port;
(b) “aerodrome” means aerodrome as defined for the purposes of
the enactments relating to airways, aircraft and air navigation.
365. Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions
given by the Union.—Where any State has failed to comply with, or to give
effect to, any directions given in the exercise of the executive power of the Union
under any of the provisions of this Constitution, it shall be lawful for the
President to hold that a situation has arisen in which the Government of the State
cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
366. Definitions.—In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following expressions have the meanings hereby respectively
assigned to them, that is to say—
(1) “agricultural income” means agricultural income as defined
for the purposes of the enactments relating to Indian income-tax;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
223
(2) “an Anglo-Indian” means a person whose father or any of
whose other male progenitors in the male line is or was of European
descent but who is domiciled within the territory of India and is or was
born within such territory of parents habitually resident therein and not
established there for temporary purposes only;
(3) “article” means an article of this Constitution;
(4) “borrow” includes the raising of money by the grant of
annuities, and “loan” shall be construed accordingly; 1
[(4A)* * * *]
(5) “clause” means a clause of the article in which the expression
occurs;
(6) “corporation tax” means any tax on income, so far as that tax
is payable by companies and is a tax in the case of which the following
conditions are fulfilled:—
(a) that it is not chargeable in respect of agricultural
income;
(b) that no deduction in respect of the tax paid by
companies is, by any enactments which may apply to the tax,
authorised to be made from dividends payable by the companies
to individuals;
(c) that no provision exists for taking the tax so paid into
account in computing for the purposes of Indian income-tax the
total income of individuals receiving such dividends, or in
computing the Indian income-tax payable by, or refundable to,
such individuals;
(7) “corresponding Province”, “corresponding Indian State” or
“corresponding State” means in cases of doubt such Province, Indian
State or State as may be determined by the President to be the
corresponding Province, the corresponding Indian State or the
corresponding State, as the case may be, for the particular purpose in
question; ______________________________________________
1. Cl. (4A) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 54
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and subsequently omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment)
Act, 1977, s. 11 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
224
(8) “debt” includes any liability in respect of any obligation to
repay capital sums by way of annuities and any liability under any
guarantee, and “debt charges” shall be construed accordingly;
(9) “estate duty” means a duty to be assessed on or by reference to
the principal value, ascertained in accordance with such rules as may be
prescribed by or under laws made by Parliament or the Legislature of a
State relating to the duty, of all property passing upon death or deemed,
under the provisions of the said laws, so to pass;
(10) “existing law” means any law, Ordinance, order, bye-law,
rule or regulation passed or made before the commencement of this
Constitution by any Legislature, authority or person having power to
make such a law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or regulation;
(11) “Federal Court” means the Federal Court constituted under
the Government of India Act, 1935;
(12) “goods” includes all materials, commodities, and articles; 1
[(12A) “goods and services tax” means any tax on supply of
goods, or services or both except taxes on the supply of the alcoholic
liquor for human consumption];
(13) “guarantee” includes any obligation undertaken before the
commencement of this Constitution to make payments in the event of the
profits of an undertaking falling short of a specified amount;
(14) “High Court” means any Court which is deemed for the
purposes of this Constitution to be a High Court for any State and
includes—
(a) any Court in the territory of India constituted or
reconstituted under this Constitution as a High Court; and
(b) any other Court in the territory of India which may be
declared by Parliament by law to be a High Court for all or any of
the purposes of this Constitution;
(15) “Indian State” means any territory which the Government of
the Dominion of India recognised as such a State; ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 14(i)
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
225
(16) “Part” means a Part of this Constitution;
(17) “pension” means a pension, whether contributory or not, of
any kind whatsoever payable to or in respect of any person, and includes
retired pay so payable; a gratuity so payable and any sum or sums so
payable by way of the return, with or without interest thereon or any
other addition thereto, of subscriptions to a provident fund;
(18) “Proclamation of Emergency” means a Proclamation issued
under clause (1) of article 352;
(19) “public notification” means a notification in the Gazette of
India, or, as the case may be, the Official Gazette of a State;
(20) “railway” does not include—(a) a tramway wholly within a municipal area; or
(b) any other line of communication wholly situate in one State
and declared by Parliament by law not to be a railway; 1
[(21)* * * *] 2
[(22) “Ruler” means the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any
time before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler of
an Indian State or any person who, at any time before such
commencement, was recognised by the President as the successor of
such Ruler;]
(23) “Schedule” means a Schedule to this Constitution;
(24) “Scheduled Castes” means such castes, races or tribes or
parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under
article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this Constitution;
(25) “Scheduled Tribes” means such tribes or tribal communities
or parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities as are
deemed under article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of this
Constitution; ______________________________________________
1. Cl. (21) omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 28-12-1971).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
226
(26) “securities” includes stock; 1
* * * 2
[(26A) “Services” means anything other than goods;
(26B) “State” with reference to articles 246A, 268, 269, 269A and
article 279A includes a Union territory with Legislature]; 3
[(26C) "socially and educationally backward classes" means such
backward classes as are so deemed under article 342A for the purposes
of the Central Government or the State or Union territory, as the case
may be];
(27) “sub-clause” means a sub-clause of the clause in which the
expression occurs;
(28) “taxation” includes the imposition of any tax or impost,
whether general or local or special, and “tax” shall be construed
accordingly;
(29) “tax on income” includes a tax in the nature of an excess
profits tax; 4
[(29A) “tax on the sale or purchase of goods” includes—
(a) a tax on the transfer, otherwise than in pursuance of a
contract, of property in any goods for cash, deferred payment or
other valuable consideration;
(b) a tax on the transfer of property in goods (whether as
goods or in some other form) involved in the execution of a
works contract;
(c) a tax on the delivery of goods on hire-purchase or any
system of payment by instalments;
(d) a tax on the transfer of the right to use any goods for
any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for cash,
deferred payment or other valuable consideration; ______________________________________________
1. Cl. (26A) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 54
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977), and subsequently omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 11 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 14(ii)
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Cl. (26C) was ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and second Amendment) Act,
2018, s. 5 (w.e.f. 14-8-2018), and subsequently subs. by the Constitution (One
Hundred and Fifth Amendment) Act, 2021, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15-9-2021).
4. Cl. (29A) ins. by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s. 4
(w.e.f. 2-2-1983).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
227
(e) a tax on the supply of goods by any unincorporated
association or body of persons to a member thereof for cash,
deferred payment or other valuable consideration;
(f) a tax on the supply, by way of or as part of any service
or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being food or any
other article for human consumption or any drink (whether or not
intoxicating), where such supply or service, is for cash, deferred
payment or other valuable consideration,
and such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall be deemed to be
a sale of those goods by the person making the transfer, delivery or
supply and a purchase of those goods by the person to whom such
transfer, delivery or supply is made;] 1
[(30) "Union territory" means any Union territory specified in the
First Schedule and includes any other territory comprised within the
territory of India but not specified in that Schedule.]
367. Interpretation.—(1) Unless the context otherwise requires, the
General Clauses Act, 1897, shall, subject to any adaptations and modifications
that may be made therein under article 372, apply for the interpretation of this
Constitution as it applies for the interpretation of an Act of the Legislature of
the Dominion of India.
(2) Any reference in this Constitution to Acts or laws of, or made by,
Parliament, or to Acts or laws of, or made by, the Legislature of a State 2
***,
shall be construed as including a reference to an Ordinance made by the
President or, to an Ordinance made by a Governor 3
***, as the case may be.
(3) For the purposes of this Constitution “foreign State” means any State
other than India:
Provided that, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament,
the President may by order4
declare any State not to be a foreign State for such
purposes as may be specified in the order. 5
[(4) * * * *] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. for cl. (30)
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. See the Constitution (Declaration as to Foreign States) Order, 1950 (C.O. 2).
5. Added by the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 2019
(C.O. 272) (w.e.f. 5-8-2019), for the text of this C.O., see Appendix II.
228
PART XX
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION368. 1
[Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and
procedure therefor].— 2
[(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,
Parliament may in exercise of its constituent power amend by way of addition,
variation or repeal any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the
procedure laid down in this article.] 3
[(2)] An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the
introduction of a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when
the Bill is passed in each House by a majority of the total membership of that
House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that
House present and voting, 4
[it shall be presented to the President who shall give
his assent to the Bill and thereupon] the Constitution shall stand amended in
accordance with the terms of the Bill:
Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in—(a) article 54, article 55, article 73, 5
[ article 162, article 241 or
article 279A]; or
 (b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I of Part XI; or
(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule; or
(d) the representation of States in Parliament; or
(e) the provisions of this article, ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3, for "Procedure
for amendment of the Constitution" (w.e.f. 5-11-1971).
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 5-11-1971).
3. Art. 368 re-numbered as cl. (2) thereof by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 5-11-1971).
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., (w.e.f. 5-11-1971).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 15, for the
words and figures "article 162 or article 241" (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XX.—Amendment of the Constitution)
229
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less
than one-half of the States 1
*** by resolutions to that effect passed by those
Legislatures before the Bill making provision for such amendment is presented
to the President for assent. 2
[(3) Nothing in article 13 shall apply to any amendment made under this
article.]3
[(4) No amendment of this Constitution (including the provisions of
Part III) made or purporting to have been made under this article [whether before
or after the commencement of section 55 of the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976] shall be called in question in any court on any ground.
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there shall be no
limitation whatever on the constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of
addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this Constitution under this article.]
______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5-11-1971).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 55 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
This section has been declared invalid by the Supreme Court in Minerva Mills Ltd.
and Others Vs. Union of India and Others AIR 1980 SC 1789.
230
PART XXI 1
[TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL AND
SPECIAL PROVISIONS]
369. Temporary power to Parliament to make laws with respect to
certain matters in the State List as if they were matters in the Concurrent
List.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament shall, during
a period of five years from the commencement of this Constitution, have power
to make laws with respect to the following matters as if they were enumerated
in the Concurrent List, namely:—
(a) trade and commerce within a State in, and the production, supply
and distribution of, cotton and woollen textiles, raw cotton (including
ginned cotton and unginned cotton or kapas), cotton seed, paper
(including newsprint), food-stuffs (including edible oilseeds and oil),
cattle fodder (including oil-cakes and other concentrates), coal
(including coke and derivatives of coal), iron, steel and mica;
(b) offences against laws with respect to any of the matters mentioned
in clause (a), jurisdiction and powers of all courts except the Supreme
Court with respect to any of those matters, and fees in respect of any of
those matters but not including fees taken in any court,
but any law made by Parliament, which Parliament would not but for the
provisions of this article have been competent to make, shall, to the extent of the
incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of the said period, except as
respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration thereof. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 2, for "TEMPORARYAND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS" (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
231
1
[370. Temporary provisions with respect to the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) the provisions of article 238 shall not apply in relation to the State
of Jammu and Kashmir;
(b) the power of Parliament to make laws for the said State shall be
limited to—
(i) those matters in the Union List and the Concurrent List
which, in consultation with the Government of the State, are declared
by the President to correspond to matters specified in the Instrument
of Accession governing the accession of the State to the Dominion of
India as the matters with respect to which the Dominion Legislature
may make laws for that State; and
______________________________________________
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (3) of article 370 read with clause (1) of
article 370 of the Constitution of India, the President, on the recommendation of
Parliament, is pleased to declare that, as from the 6th August, 2019 all clauses of said
article 370 shall cease to be operative except the following which shall read as under,
namely:—
“370. All provisions of this Constitution, as amended from time to time,
without any modifications or exceptions, shall apply to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir notwithstanding anything contrary contained in article 152 or article 308 or
any other article of this Constitution or any other provision of the Constitution of
Jammu and Kashmir or any law, document, judgment, ordinance, order, by-law, rule,
regulation, notification, custom or usage having the force of law in the territory of
India, or any other instrument, treaty or agreement as envisaged under article 363 or
otherwise.”.
(See Appendix III) (C.O. 273).
1. In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (3) of the Constitution of India, the
President, on the recommendation of the Constituent Assembly of the State of Jammu
and Kashmir, declared that, as from the 17th day of November, 1952, the said art. 370
shall be operative with the modification that for the Explanation in cl. (1) thereof, the
following Explanation is substituted, namely:—“Explanation.–For the purposes of this article, the Government of the State means
the person for the time being recognised by the President on the recommendation of
the Legislative Assembly of the State as the *Sadar-I-Riyasat of Jammu and Kashmir,
acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers of the State for the time being in
office.”.
(C.O. 44, dated the 15th November, 1952).
*Now “Governor”.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
232
(ii) such other matters in the said Lists as, with the concurrence
of the Government of the State, the President may by order specify.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, the
Government of the State means the person for the time being recognised
by the President as the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir acting on the
advice of the Council of Ministers for the time being in office under the
Maharaja’s Proclamation dated the fifth day of March, 1948;
(c) the provisions of article 1 and of this article shall apply in relation
to that State;
(d) such of the other provisions of this Constitution shall apply in
relation to that State subject to such exceptions and modifications as the
President may by order specify:
Provided that no such order which relates to the matters specified in the
Instrument of Accession of the State referred to in paragraph (i) of
sub-clause (b) shall be issued except in consultation with the Government of
the State:
Provided further that no such order which relates to matters other than
those referred to in the last preceding proviso shall be issued except with the
concurrence of that Government.
(2) If the concurrence of the Government of the State referred to in
paragraph (ii) of sub-clause (b) of clause (1) or in the second proviso to
sub-clause (d) of that clause be given before the Constituent Assembly for the
purpose of framing the Constitution of the State is convened, it shall be placed
before such Assembly for such decision as it may take thereon.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this article,
the President may, by public notification, declare that this article shall cease to
be operative or shall be operative only with such exceptions and modifications
and from such date as he may specify:
Provided that the recommendation of the 1
[clause (2) of Legislative
Assembly of the State] shall be necessary before the President issues such a
notification. ______________________________________________
See Appendix II.
1. Subs. by C.O. 272, dated the 5-8-2019, s.2. for “Constituent Assembly of the State
referred to in clause (2)” (w.e.f. 5-8-2019).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
233
1
[371. Special provision with respect to the States of 2
*** Maharashtra and Gujarat.—3
[(1)* * * * *]
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may by
order made with respect to 4
[the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat], provide for
any special responsibility of the Governor for—(a) the establishment of separate development boards for Vidarbha,
Marathwada, 5
[and the rest of Maharashtra or, as the case may be],
Saurashtra, Kutch and the rest of Gujarat with the provision that a report
on the working of each of these boards will be placed each year before
the State Legislative Assembly;
(b) the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure
over the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole;
and
(c) an equitable arrangement providing adequate facilities for
technical education and vocational training, and adequate opportunities
for employment in services under the control of the State Government, in
respect of all the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a
whole.] 6
[371A. Special provision with respect to the State of Nagaland.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of—(i) religious or social practices of the Nagas;
(ii) Naga customary law and procedure;
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involving
decisions according to Naga customary law;
(iv) ownership and transfer of land and its resources,
shall apply to the State of Nagaland unless the Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland by a resolution so decides; ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 22, for art. 371
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "Andhra Pradesh", omitted by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment)
Act, 1973, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).
3. Cl. (1) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).
4. Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 85, for "the State of
Bombay" (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
5. Subs. by s. 85, ibid., for "the rest of Maharashtra" (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
6. Art. 371A ins. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 2
(w.e.f. 1-12-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
234
(b) the Governor of Nagaland shall have special responsibility with
respect to law and order in the State of Nagaland for so long as in his
opinion internal disturbances occurring in the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area
immediately before the formation of that State continue therein or in any
part thereof and in the discharge of his functions in relation thereto the
Governor shall, after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercise his
individual judgment as to the action to be taken:
Provided that if any question arises whether any matter is or is
not a matter as respects which the Governor is under this sub-clause
required to act in the exercise of his individual judgment, the decision of
the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and the validity of
anything done by the Governor shall not be called in question on the
ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in the exercise of his
individual judgment:
Provided further that if the President on receipt of a report from
the Governor or otherwise is satisfied that it is no longer necessary for
the Governor to have special responsibility with respect to law and order
in the State of Nagaland, he may by order direct that the Governor shall
cease to have such responsibility with effect from such date as may be
specified in the order;
(c) in making his recommendation with respect to any demand for a
grant, the Governor of Nagaland shall ensure that any money provided
by the Government of India out of the Consolidated Fund of India for
any specific service or purpose is included in the demand for a grant
relating to that service or purpose and not in any other demand;
(d) as from such date as the Governor of Nagaland may by public
notification in this behalf specify, there shall be established a regional
council for the Tuensang district consisting of thirty-five members and
the Governor shall in his discretion make rules providing for—(i) the composition of the regional council and the manner in
which the members of the regional council shall be chosen:
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner of the Tuensang district
shall be the Chairman ex officio of the regional council and the ViceChairman of the regional council shall be elected by the members
thereof from amongst themselves;
(ii) the qualifications for being chosen as, and for being,
members of the regional council;
(iii) the term of office of, and the salaries and allowances, if any,
to be paid to members of, the regional council;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
235
(iv) the procedure and conduct of business of the regional council;
(v) the appointment of officers and staff of the regional council
and their conditions of services; and
(vi) any other matter in respect of which it is necessary to make
rules for the constitution and proper functioning of the regional council.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, for a period of ten
years from the date of the formation of the State of Nagaland or for such further
period as the Governor may, on the recommendation of the regional council, by
public notification specify in this behalf,—(a) the administration of the Tuensang district shall be carried on by
the Governor;
(b) where any money is provided by the Government of India to the
Government of Nagaland to meet the requirements of the State of
Nagaland as a whole, the Governor shall in his discretion arrange for an
equitable allocation of that money between the Tuensang district and the
rest of the State;
(c) no Act of the Legislature of Nagaland shall apply to Tuensang
district unless the Governor, on the recommendation of the regional
council, by public notification so directs and the Governor in giving such
direction with respect to any such Act may direct that the Act shall in its
application to the Tuensang district or any part thereof have effect
subject to such exceptions or modifications as the Governor may specify
on the recommendation of the regional council:
Provided that any direction given under this sub-clause may be
given so as to have retrospective effect;
(d) the Governor may make regulations for the peace, progress and good
government of the Tuensang district and any regulations so made may repeal
or amend with retrospective effect, if necessary, any Act of Parliament or any
other law which is for the time being applicable to that district;
(e) (i) one of the members representing the Tuensang district in the
Legislative Assembly of Nagaland shall be appointed Minister for
Tuensang affairs by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister
and the Chief Minister in tendering his advice shall act on the
recommendation of the majority of the members as aforesaid1
; ______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 2 of the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. X provides
(w.e.f. 1-12-1963) that article 371A of the Constitution of India shall have effect as if
the following proviso were added to paragraph (i) of sub-clause (e) of clause (2)
thereof, namely:—
"Provided that the Governor may, on the advice of the Chief Minister, appoint
any person as Minister for Tuensang affairs to act as such until such time as persons
are chosen in accordance with law to fill the seats allocated to the Tuensang district, in
the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland.".
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
236
(ii) the Minister for Tuensang affairs shall deal with, and have
direct access to the Governor on, all matters relating to the Tuensang
district but he shall keep the Chief Minister informed about the same;
(f) notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this
clause, the final decision on all matters relating to the Tuensang district
shall be made by the Governor in his discretion;
(g) in articles 54 and 55 and clause (4) of article 80, references to the
elected members of the Legislative Assembly of a State or to each such
member shall include references to the members or member of the
Legislative Assembly of Nagaland elected by the regional council
established under this article;
(h) in article 170—
(i) clause (1) shall, in relation to the Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland, have effect as if for the word “sixty”, the word “fortysix” had been substituted;
(ii) in the said clause, the reference to direct election from
territorial constituencies in the State shall include election by the
members of the regional council established under this article;
(iii) in clauses (2) and (3), references to territorial constituencies
shall mean references to territorial constituencies in the Kohima
and Mokokchung districts.
(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the foregoing
provisions of this article, the President may by order do anything (including
any adaptation or modification of any other article) which appears to him to be
necessary for the purpose of removing that difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of three
years from the date of the formation of the State of Nagaland.
Explanation.—In this article, the Kohima, Mokokchung and Tuensang
districts shall have the same meanings as in the State of Nagaland Act, 1962.] 1
[371B. Special provision with respect to the State of Assam.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order
made with respect to the State of Assam, provide for the constitution and
functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-9-1969).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
237
members of that Assembly elected from the tribal areas specified in 1
[Part I] of
the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule and such number of
other members of that Assembly as may be specified in the order and for the
modifications to be made in the rules of procedure of that Assembly for the
constitution and proper functioning of such committee.] 2
[371C. Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order made
with respect to the State of Manipur, provide for the constitution and functions of
a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members of
that Assembly elected from the Hill Areas of that State, for the modifications to
be made in the rules of business of the Government and in the rules of procedure
of the Legislative Assembly of the State and for any special responsibility of the
Governor in order to secure the proper functioning of such committee.
(2) The Governor shall annually, or whenever so required by the President,
make a report to the President regarding the administration of the Hill Areas in
the State of Manipur and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the
giving of directions to the State as to the administration of the said areas.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “Hill Areas” means such
areas as the President may, by order, declare to be Hill areas.] 3
[371D. Special provisions with respect to 4
[the State of Andhra
Pradesh or the State of Telangana].—5
[(1) The President may by order made
with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana, provide,
having regard to the requirement of each State, for equitable opportunities and
facilities for the people belonging to different parts of such State, in the matter
of public employment and in the matter of education, and different provisions
may be made for various parts of the States.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
"Part A" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Art 371C ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 5
(w.e.f. 15-2-1972).
3. Art 371D and Art 371E ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act,
1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).
4. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, (6 of 2014), s. 97, for “the
State of Andhra Pradesh” (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
5. Subs. by s. 97, ibid, for cl. (1) (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
238
(2) An order made under clause (1) may, in particular,—(a) require the State Government to organise any class or classes of
posts in a civil service of, or any class or classes of civil posts under, the
State into different local cadres for different parts of the State and allot
in accordance with such principles and procedure as may be specified in
the order the persons holding such posts to the local cadres so organised;
(b) specify any part or parts of the State which shall be regarded as
the local area—
(i) for direct recruitment to posts in any local cadre (whether
organised in pursuance of an order under this article or constituted
otherwise) under the State Government;
 (ii) for direct recruitment to posts in any cadre under any local
authority within the State; and
(iii) for the purposes of admission to any University within the
State or to any other educational institution which is subject to the
control of the State Government;
(c) specify the extent to which, the manner in which and the
conditions subject to which, preference or reservation shall be given or
made—
(i) in the matter of direct recruitment to posts in any such cadre
referred to in sub-clause (b) as may be specified in this behalf in
the order;
(ii) in the matter of admission to any such University or other
educational institution referred to in sub-clause (b) as may be
specified in this behalf in the order,
to or in favour of candidates who have resided or studied for any period
specified in the order in the local area in respect of such cadre,
University or other educational institution, as the case may be.
(3) The President may, by order, provide for the constitution of an
Administrative Tribunal for 1
[the State of Andhra Pradesh and for the State of
Telangana] to exercise such jurisdiction, powers and authority [including any
jurisdiction, power and authority which immediately before the commencement
of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, was exercisable by
any court (other than the Supreme Court) or by any tribunal or other authority]
as may be specified in the order with respect to the following matters,
namely:— ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, (6 of 2014), s. 97, for “the
State of Andhra Pradesh” (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
239
(a) appointment, allotment or promotion to such class or classes of
posts in any civil service of the State, or to such class or classes of civil
posts under the State, or to such class or classes of posts under the
control of any local authority within the State, as may be specified in the
order;
(b) seniority of persons appointed, allotted or promoted to such class
or classes of posts in any civil service of the State, or to such class or
classes of civil posts under the State, or to such class or classes of posts
under the control of any local authority within the State, as may be
specified in the order;
(c) such other conditions of service of persons appointed, allotted or
promoted to such class or classes of posts in any civil service of the State
or to such class or classes of civil posts under the State or to such class
or classes of posts under the control of any local authority within the
State, as may be specified in the order.
(4) An order made under clause (3) may—(a) authorise the Administrative Tribunal to receive representations
for the redress of grievances relating to any matter within its jurisdiction
as the President may specify in the order and to make such orders
thereon as the Administrative Tribunal deems fit;
(b) contain such provisions with respect to the powers and authorities
and procedure of the Administrative Tribunal (including provisions with
respect to the powers of the Administrative Tribunal to punish for
contempt of itself) as the President may deem necessary;
(c) provide for the transfer to the Administrative Tribunal of such
classes of proceedings, being proceedings relating to matters within its
jurisdiction and pending before any court (other than the Supreme Court)
or tribunal or other authority immediately before the commencement of
such order, as may be specified in the order;
(d) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential
provisions (including provisions as to fees and as to limitation, evidence
or for the application of any law for the time being in force subject to
any exceptions or modifications) as the President may deem necessary.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
240
(5) The Order of the Administrative Tribunal finally disposing of any
case shall become effective upon its confirmation by the State Government or
on the expiry of three months from the date on which the order is made,
whichever is earlier:
Provided that the State Government may, by special order made in
writing and for reasons to be specified therein, modify or annul any order of the
Administrative Tribunal before it becomes effective and in such a case, the
order of the Administrative Tribunal shall have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be.
(6) Every special order made by the State Government under the proviso
to clause (5) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before both
Houses of the State Legislature.
(7) The High Court for the State shall not have any powers of
superintendence over the Administrative Tribunal and no court (other than the
Supreme Court) or tribunal shall exercise any jurisdiction, power or authority in
respect of any matter subject to the jurisdiction, power or authority of, or in
relation to, the Administrative Tribunal.
(8) If the President is satisfied that the continued existence of the
Administrative Tribunal is not necessary, the President may by order abolish
the Administrative Tribunal and make such provisions in such order as he may
deem fit for the transfer and disposal of cases pending before the Tribunal
immediately before such abolition.
(9) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal
or other authority,—
(a) no appointment, posting, promotion or transfer of any person—(i) made before the 1st day of November, 1956, to any post
under the Government of, or any local authority within, the State
of Hyderabad as it existed before that date; or
(ii) made before the commencement of the Constitution
(Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, to any post under the
Government of, or any local or other authority within, the State of
Andhra Pradesh; and
(b) no action taken or thing done by or before any person referred to
in sub-clause (a), ______________________________________________
In P. Sambamurthy and Others Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and Others (1987)
1 S.C.C. 362, the Supreme Court declared cl. (5) of art. 371D along with the proviso to
be unconstitutional and void. 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
241
shall be deemed to be illegal or void or ever to have become illegal or void
merely on the ground that the appointment, posting, promotion or transfer of
such person was not made in accordance with any law, then in force, providing
for any requirement as to residence within the State of Hyderabad or, as the
case may be, within any part of the State of Andhra Pradesh, in respect of such
appointment, posting, promotion or transfer.
 (10) The provisions of this article and of any order made by the
President thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other
provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force.
371E. Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh.—Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of a University in the
State of Andhra Pradesh.] 1
[371F. Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—(a) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim shall consist of
not less than thirty members;
(b) as from the date of commencement of the Constitution
(Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975 (hereafter in this article referred to
as the appointed day)—
(i) the Assembly for Sikkim formed as a result of the elections
held in Sikkim in April, 1974 with thirty-two members elected in the
said elections (hereinafter referred to as the sitting members) shall be
deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim duly
constituted under this Constitution;
(ii) the sitting members shall be deemed to be the members of
the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim duly elected under
this Constitution; and
(iii) the said Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim shall
exercise the powers and perform the functions of the Legislative
Assembly of a State under this Constitution; ______________________________________________
1. Art 371F ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3
(w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
242
(c) in the case of the Assembly deemed to be the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Sikkim under clause (b), the references to the
period of 1
[five years], in clause (1) of article 172 shall be construed as
references to a period of 2
[four years] and the said period of 2
[four years]
shall be deemed to commence from the appointed day;
(d) until other provisions are made by Parliament by law, there shall
be allotted to the State of Sikkim one seat in the House of the People and
the State of Sikkim shall form one parliamentary constituency to be
called the parliamentary constituency for Sikkim;
(e) the representative of the State of Sikkim in the House of the
People in existence on the appointed day shall be elected by the
members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim;
(f) Parliament may, for the purpose of protecting the rights and
interests of the different sections of the population of Sikkim make
provision for the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Sikkim which may be filled by candidates belonging to such
sections and for the delimitation of the assembly constituencies from
which candidates belonging to such sections alone may stand for election
to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim;
(g) the Governor of Sikkim shall have special responsibility for peace
and for an equitable arrangement for ensuring the social and economic
advancement of different sections of the population of Sikkim and in the
discharge of his special responsibility under this clause, the Governor of
Sikkim shall, subject to such directions as the President may, from time
to time, deem fit to issue, act in his discretion;
(h) all property and assets (whether within or outside the territories
comprised in the State of Sikkim) which immediately before the appointed
day were vested in the Government of Sikkim or in any other authority or
in any person for the purposes of the Government of Sikkim shall, as from
the appointed day, vest in the Government of the State of Sikkim; ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 56, for "five years”
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 43, for "six years" (w.e.f. 6-9-1979).
2. Subs. by s. 56, ibid., for "four years" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by s. 43, ibid., for "five years", respectively (w.e.f. 6-9-1979). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
243
(i) the High Court functioning as such immediately before the
appointed day in the territories comprised in the State of Sikkim shall, on
and from the appointed day, be deemed to be the High Court for the
State of Sikkim;
(j) all courts of civil, criminal and revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and
all officers, judicial, executive and ministerial, throughout the territory of the
State of Sikkim shall continue on and from the appointed day to exercise
their respective functions subject to the provisions of this Constitution;
(k) all laws in force immediately before the appointed day in the
territories comprised in the State of Sikkim or any part thereof shall
continue to be in force therein until amended or repealed by a competent
Legislature or other competent authority;
(l) for the purpose of facilitating the application of any such law as is
referred to in clause (k) in relation to the administration of the State of
Sikkim and for the purpose of bringing the provisions of any such law
into accord with the provisions of this Constitution, the President may,
within two years from the appointed day, by order, make such
adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or
amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon, every
such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so
made, and any such adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in
any court of law;
(m) neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have
jurisdiction in respect of any dispute or other matter arising out of any
treaty, agreement, engagement or other similar instrument relating to
Sikkim which was entered into or executed before the appointed day and
to which the Government of India or any of its predecessor Governments
was a party, but nothing in this clause shall be construed to derogate
from the provisions of article 143;
(n) the President may, by public notification, extend with such restrictions
or modifications as he thinks fit to the State of Sikkim any enactment which
is in force in a State in India at the date of the notification;
(o) if any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the foregoing
provisions of this article, the President may, by order , do anything
(including any adaptation or modification of any other article) which
appears to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing that
difficulty: ______________________________________________
See the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. XI (C.O. 99).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
244
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two
years from the appointed day;
(p) all things done and all actions taken in or in relation to the State
of Sikkim or the territories comprised therein during the period
commencing on the appointed day and ending immediately before the
date on which the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975,
receives the assent of the President shall, in so far as they are in
conformity with the provisions of this Constitution as amended by the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, be deemed for all
purposes to have been validly done or taken under this Constitution as so
amended.] 1
[371G. Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of—
(i) religious or social practices of the Mizos;
(ii) Mizo customary law and procedure;
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involving
decisions according to Mizo customary law;
(iv) ownership and transfer of land;
shall apply to the State of Mizoram unless the Legislative Assembly of
the State of Mizoram by a resolution so decides:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any Central Act in
force in the Union territory of Mizoram immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-third Amendment) Act, 1986;
(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram shall consist of
not less than forty members.] 2
[371H. Special provision with respect to the State of Arunachal
Pradesh.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—(a) the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall have special
responsibility with respect to law and order in the State of Arunachal
Pradesh and in the discharge of his functions in relation thereto, the
Governor shall, after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercise his
individual judgment as to the action to be taken: ______________________________________________
1. Art. 371G ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-third Amendment) Act, 1986.s. 2
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
2. Art. 371H ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
245
Provided that if any question arises whether any matter is or is not a
matter as respects which the Governor is under this clause required to act
in the exercise of his individual judgment, the decision of the Governor in
his discretion shall be final, and the validity of anything done by the
Governor shall not be called in question on the ground that he ought or
ought not to have acted in the exercise of his individual judgment:
Provided further that if the President on receipt of a report from
the Governor or otherwise is satisfied that it is no longer necessary for
the Governor to have special responsibility with respect to law and order
in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, he may by order direct that the
Governor shall cease to have such responsibility with effect from such
date as may be specified in the order;
(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh
shall consist of not less than thirty members.] 1
[371-I. Special provision with respect to the State of Goa.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Goa shall consist of not less than thirty members.] 2
[371J. Special provisions with respect to State of Karnataka.—(1) The President may, by order made with respect to the State of Karnataka,
provide for any special responsibility of the Governor for—(a) establishment of a separate development board for HyderabadKarnataka region with the provision that a report on the working of the
board will be placed each year before the State Legislative Assembly;
(b) equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure
over the said region, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole;
and
(c) equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging
to the said region, in matters of public employment, education and
vocational training, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole.
(2) An order made under sub- clause (c) of clause (1) may provide for—(a) reservation of a proportion of seats educational and vocational
training institutions in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region for students who
belong to that region by birth or by domicile; and ______________________________________________
1. Art. 371-I ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
2. Art. 371J ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-eighth Amendment) Act, 2012, s. 2 (w.e.f.
1-10-2013).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
246
(b) identification of posts or classes of posts under the State
Government and in any body or organisation under the control of the
State Government in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region and reservation of
a proportion of such posts for persons who belong to that region by birth
or by domicile and for appointment thereto by direct recruitment or by
promotion or in any other manner as may be specified in the order.]
372. Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation.—(1)
Notwithstanding the repeal by this Constitution of the enactments referred to in
article 395 but subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, all the law in
force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution shall continue in force therein until altered or repealed or amended
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.
(2) For the purpose of bringing the provisions of any law in force in the
territory of India into accord with the provisions of this Constitution, the
President may by order make such adaptations and modifications of such law,
whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and
provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be specified in the order,
have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made, and any such
adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in any court of law.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall be deemed—(a) to empower the President to make any adaptation or
modification of any law after the expiration of 1
[three years] from the
commencement of this Constitution; or
(b) to prevent any competent Legislature or other competent
authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by
the President under the said clause. ______________________________________________ See the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of
India, Extraordinary, p. 449, as amended by notification No. S.R.O. 115, dated the 5th
June, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 51, notification No.
S.R.O. 870, dated the 4th November, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,
Section 3, p. 903, notification No. S.R.O. 508, dated the 4th April, 1951, Gazette of
India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 287, notification No. S.R.O. 1140B, dated
the 2nd July, 1952, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 616/1, and the
Adaptation of the Travancore-Cochin Land Acquisition Laws Order, 1952, dated the
20th November, 1952, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 923.
1. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s.12 for "two years"
(w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
247
Explanation I.—The expression “law in force” in this article shall
include a law passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in
the territory of India before the commencement of this Constitution and not
previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not be then in
operation either at all or in particular areas.
Explanation II.—Any law passed or made by a Legislature or other
competent authority in the territory of India which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution had extra-territorial effect as well as effect
in the territory of India shall, subject to any such adaptations and modifications
as aforesaid, continue to have such extra-territorial effect.
Explanation III.—Nothing in this article shall be construed as continuing
any temporary law in force beyond the date fixed for its expiration or the date
on which it would have expired if this Constitution had not come into force.
Explanation IV.—An Ordinance promulgated by the Governor of a
Province under section 88 of the Government of India Act, 1935, and in force
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless
withdrawn by the Governor of the corresponding State earlier, cease to operate
at the expiration of six weeks from the first meeting after such commencement
of the Legislative Assembly of that State functioning under clause (1) of article
382, and nothing in this article shall be construed as continuing any such
Ordinance in force beyond the said period. 1
[372A. Power of the President to adapt laws.—(1) For the purposes
of bringing the provisions of any law in force in India or in any part thereof,
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, into accord with the provisions of this Constitution as
amended by that Act, the President may by order made before the first day of
November, 1957, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether
by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and provide
that the law shall, as from such date as may be specified in the order, have
effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made, and any such
adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in any court of law.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall be deemed to prevent a competent
Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law
adapted or modified by the President under the said clause.] ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
See the Adaptation of Laws Order of 1956 and 1957. 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
248
373. Power of President to make order in respect of persons under
preventive detention in certain cases.—Until provision is made by Parliament
under clause (7) of article 22, or until the expiration of one year from the
commencement of this Constitution, whichever is earlier, the said article shall
have effect as if for any reference to Parliament in clauses (4) and (7) thereof
there were substituted a reference to the President and for any reference to any
law made by Parliament in those clauses there were substituted a reference to
an order made by the President.
374. Provisions as to Judges of the Federal Court and proceedings
pending in the Federal Court or before His Majesty in Council.—(1) The
Judges of the Federal Court holding office immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise,
become on such commencement the Judges of the Supreme Court and shall
thereupon be entitled to such salaries and allowances and to such rights in
respect of leave of absence and pension as are provided for under article 125 in
respect of the Judges of the Supreme Court.
(2) All suits, appeals and proceedings, civil or criminal, pending in the
Federal Court at the commencement of this Constitution shall stand removed to
the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and
determine the same, and the judgments and orders of the Federal Court delivered
or made before the commencement of this Constitution shall have the same force
and effect as if they had been delivered or made by the Supreme Court.
(3) Nothing in this Constitution shall operate to invalidate the exercise of
jurisdiction by His Majesty in Council to dispose of appeals and petitions from,
or in respect of, any judgment, decree or order of any court within the territory
of India in so far as the exercise of such jurisdiction is authorised by law, and
any order of His Majesty in Council made on any such appeal or petition after
the commencement of this Constitution shall for all purposes have effect as if it
were an order or decree made by the Supreme Court in the exercise of the
jurisdiction conferred on such Court by this Constitution.
(4) On and from the commencement of this Constitution the jurisdiction of
the authority functioning as the Privy Council in a State specified in Part B of the
First Schedule to entertain and dispose of appeals and petitions from or in respect
of any judgment, decree or order of any court within that State shall cease, and all
appeals and other proceedings pending before the said authority at such
commencement shall be transferred to, and disposed of by, the Supreme Court.
(5) Further provision may be made by Parliament by law to give effect to
the provisions of this article.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
249
375. Courts, authorities and officers to continue to function subject
to the provisions of the Constitution.—All courts of civil, criminal and
revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial, executive and
ministerial, throughout the territory of India, shall continue to exercise their
respective functions subject to the provisions of this Constitution.
376. Provisions as to Judges of High Courts.—(1) Notwithstanding
anything in clause (2) of article 217, the Judges of a High Court in any
Province holding office immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on such
commencement the Judges of the High Court in the corresponding State, and
shall thereupon be entitled to such salaries and allowances and to such rights in
respect of leave of absence and pension as are provided for under article 221 in
respect of the Judges of such High Court. 1
[Any such Judge shall,
notwithstanding that he is not a citizen of India, be eligible for appointment as
Chief Justice of such High Court, or as Chief Justice or other Judge of any
other High Court.]
(2) The Judges of a High Court in any Indian State corresponding to any
State specified in Part B of the First Schedule holding office immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they have elected
otherwise, become on such commencement the Judges of the High Court in the
State so specified and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and (2) of
article 217 but subject to the proviso to clause (1) of that article, continue to hold
office until the expiration of such period as the President may by order determine.
(3) In this article, the expression “Judge” does not include an acting Judge
or an additional Judge.
377. Provisions as to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.—The
Auditor-General of India holding office immediately before the commencement of
this Constitution shall, unless he has elected otherwise, become on such
commencement the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and shall thereupon
be entitled to such salaries and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and
pension as are provided for under clause (3) of article 148 in respect of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and be entitled to continue to hold office
until the expiration of his term of office as determined under the provisions which
were applicable to him immediately before such commencement. ______________________________________________
1. Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 13 (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
250
378. Provisions as to Public Service Commissions.—(1) The members
of the Public Service Commission for the Dominion of India holding office
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they
have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the members of the
Public Service Commission for the Union and shall, notwithstanding anything in
clauses (1) and (2) of article 316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2) of that
article, continue to hold office until the expiration of their term of office as
determined under the rules which were applicable immediately before such
commencement to such members.
(2) The Members of a Public Service Commission of a Province or of a
Public Service Commission serving the needs of a group of Provinces holding
office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they
have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the members of the Public
Service Commission for the corresponding State or the members of the Joint State
Public Service Commission serving the needs of the corresponding States, as the
case may be, and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and (2) of article
316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2) of that article, continue to hold office
until the expiration of their term of office as determined under the rules which were
applicable immediately before such commencement to such members. 1
[378A. Special provision as to duration of Andhra Pradesh
Legislative Assembly.—Notwithstanding anything contained in article 172, the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Andhra Pradesh as constituted under the
provisions of sections 28 and 29 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall,
unless sooner dissolved, continue for a period of five years from the date referred
to in the said section 29 and no longer and the expiration of the said period shall
operate as a dissolution of that Legislative Assembly.]
379. [Provisions as to provisional Parliament and the Speaker and
Deputy Speaker thereof.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
380. [Provision as to President.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
381. [Council of Ministers of the President.].—Omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
382. [Provisions as to provisional Legislatures for States in Part A of the
First Schedule.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
383. [Provision as to Governors of Provinces.].—Omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). ______________________________________________
1. Art 378A ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 24
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
251
384. [Council of Ministers of the Governors.].—Omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
385. [Provision as to provisional Legislatures in States in Part B of the
First Schedule.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
386. [Council of Ministers for States in Part B of the First Schedule.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
387. [Special provision as to determination of population for the
purposes of certain elections.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
388. [Provisions as to the filling of casual vacancies in the provisional
Parliament and provisional Legislatures of the States.].—Omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
389. [Provision as to Bills pending in the Dominion Legislatures and in
the Legislatures of Provinces and Indian States.] —Omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
390. [Money received or raised or expenditure incurred between the
commencement of the Constitution and the 31st day of March, 1950].—Omitted
by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-
1956).
391. [Power of the President to amend the First and Fourth Schedules in
certain contingencies.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
392. Power of the President to remove difficulties.—(1) The President
may, for the purpose of removing any difficulties, particularly in relation to the
transition from the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935, to the
provisions of this Constitution, by order direct that this Constitution shall,
during such period as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to such
adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or omission, as he may
deem to be necessary or expedient:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the first meeting of
Parliament duly constituted under Chapter II of Part V.
(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall be laid before Parliament.
(3) The powers conferred on the President by this article, by article 324, by
clause (3) of article 367 and by article 391 shall, before the commencement of this
Constitution, be exercisable by the Governor-General of the Dominion of India.
252
PART XXII
SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT, 1
[AUTHORITATIVE
TEXT IN HINDI] AND REPEALS
393. Short title.—This Constitution may be called the Constitution of
India.
394. Commencement.—This article and articles 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 60, 324,
366, 367, 379, 380, 388, 391, 392 and 393 shall come into force at once, and
the remaining provisions of this Constitution shall come into force on the
twenty-sixth day of January, 1950, which day is referred to in this Constitution
as the commencement of this Constitution. 2
[394A. Authoritative text in the Hindi language.—(1) The President
shall cause to be published under his authority,—
(a) the translation of this Constitution in the Hindi language,
signed by the members of the Constituent Assembly, with such
modifications as may be necessary to bring it in conformity with the
language, style and terminology adopted in the authoritative texts of
Central Acts in the Hindi language, and incorporating therein all the
amendments of this Constitution made before such publication; and
(b) the translation in the Hindi language of every amendment of
this Constitution made in the English language.
(2) The translation of this Constitution and of every amendment thereof
published under clause (1) shall be construed to have the same meaning as the
original thereof and if any difficulty arises in so construing any part of such
translation, the President shall cause the same to be revised suitably.
(3) The translation of this Constitution and of every amendment thereof
published under this article shall be deemed to be, for all purposes, the
authoritative text thereof in the Hindi language.]
395. Repeals.— The Indian Independence Act, 1947, and the
Government of India Act, 1935, together with all enactments amending or
supplementing the latter Act, but not including the Abolition of Privy Council
Jurisdiction Act, 1949, are hereby repealed. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-12-1987).
2. Art 394A, Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-12-1987).
253
1
[FIRST SCHEDULE
[Articles 1 and 4]
I. THE STATES
Name Territories
1. Andhra
Pradesh
2
[The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of
the Andhra State Act, 1953, sub-section (1) of section 3 of
the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the First Schedule to
the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries)
Act, 1959, and the Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and
Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968, but excluding
the territories specified in the Second Schedule to the
Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries)
Act, 1959] 3
[and the territories specified in section 3 of
the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014]. 2. Assam The territories which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution were comprised in the
Province of Assam, the Khasi States and the Assam Tribal
Areas, but excluding the territories
specified in the Schedule to the Assam
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951 4
[and the territories
specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the State of
Nagaland Act, 1962] 5
[and the territories specified in
sections 5, 6 and 7 of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971] 6
[and the territories referred
to in Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution
(One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015,
notwithstanding anything contained
in clause (a) of section 3 of the Constitution
(Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the
territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule to
the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act,
2015.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2, for the First Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968 (36 of 1968), s. 4,
for the former entry (w.e.f. 1-10-1968).
3. Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 (6 of 2014), s. 10 (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
4. Added by the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 (27 of 1962), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).
5. Added by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 9 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
6. Added by the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31-7-2015). For
the text of the Act, see Appendix I.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(First Schedule)
 Name Territories
254
3. Bihar 1
[The territories which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution were either
comprised in the Province of Bihar or were being
administered as if they formed part of that Province
and the territories specified in clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar
Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, but
excluding the territories specified in sub-section (1) of
section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956, and the territories
specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section
3 of the first mentioned Act 2
[and the territories
specified in section 3 of the Bihar Reorganisation Act,
2000].] 3
[4. Gujarat The territories referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3 of
the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960.]
5. Kerala The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 5
of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
6. Madhya
Pradesh
The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 9 of
the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 4
[and the First
Schedule to the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer
of Territories) Act, 1959], 5
[but excluding the territories
specified in section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, 2000]. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968
(24 of 1968), s. 4, for the former entry (w.e.f. 10-6-1970).
2. Added by the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 (30 of 2000), s. 5 (w.e.f. 15-11- 2000).
3. Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
4. Ins. by the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959
(47 of 1959), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-10-1959).
5. Added by the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (28 of 2000), s. 5
(w.e.f. 1-11-2000).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(First Schedule)
 Name Territories
255
1
[7. Tamil Nadu]
 The territories which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution were either
comprised in the Province of Madras or were being
administered as if they formed part of that Province and
the territories specified in section 4 of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956, 2
[and the Second Schedule to
the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of
Boundaries) Act, 1959], but excluding the territories
specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 and
sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953
and 3
[the territories specified in clause (b) of sub-section
(1) of section 5, section 6 and clause (d) of sub-section
(1) of section 7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956
and the territories specified in the First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959.] 4
[8. Maharashtra The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 8
of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, but excluding
the territories referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3
of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960.] 5
[6
[9.]
Karnataka]
The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 7
of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 7
[but excluding
the territory specified in the Schedule to the Andhra
Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 5,
for "7. Madras" (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).
2. Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959
(56 of 1959), s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-4-1960).
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1-4-1960).
4. Ins. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
5. Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (31 of 1973), s. 5, for
"9. Mysore" (w.e.f. 1-11-1973).
6. Entries 8 to 14 renumbered as entries 9 to 15 by the Bombay Reorganisation Act,
1960 (11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
7. Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968 (36 of
1968), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-10-1968).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(First Schedule)
 Name Territories
256
1
[10.] 2
[Odisha] The territories which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised
in the Province of Orissa or were being administered as if
they formed part of that Province. 1
[11.] Punjab The territories specified in section 11 of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956 3
[and the territories referred
to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Acquired
Territories (Merger) Act, 1960] 4
[but excluding the
territories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to
the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960] 5
[and
the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3,
section 4 and sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Punjab
Reorganisation Act, 1966.] 1
[12.]
Rajasthan
The territories specified in section 10 of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956 6
[but excluding the territories
specified in the First Schedule to the Rajasthan and
Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959]. ______________________________________________
1. Entries 8 to 14 renumbered as entries 9 to 15 by the Bombay Reorganisation Act,
1960 (11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
2. Subs. by the Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011 (15 of 2011), s. 6, for "Orissa"
(w.e.f. 1-11-2011).
3. Ins. by the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960 (64 of 1960), s. 4
(w.e.f. 17-1-1961).
4. Added by the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, s. 3 (w.e.f. 17-1-1961).
5. Added by the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966), s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1966).
6. Ins. by the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959
(47 of 1959), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-10-1959).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(First Schedule)
 Name Territories
257
1
[13.] Uttar
Pradesh
2
[The territories which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised
in the Province known as the United Provinces or were
being administered as if they formed part of that Province,
the territories specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1)
of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of
Boundaries) Act, 1968, and the territories specified in
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana
and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979,
but excluding the territories specified in clause (a) of subsection (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, 3
[and the territories
specified in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation
Act, 2000] and the territories specified in clause (a) of subsection (1) of section 4 of the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979.] 1
[14.] West
Bengal
The territories which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised
in the Province of West Bengal or were being administered
as if they formed part of that Province and the territory of
Chandernagore as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of
the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954 and also the
territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the
Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 4
[and also the territories referred to in Part III of the First
Schedule but excluding the territories referred to in Part III of
the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth
Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained
in clause (c) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth
Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories
referred to in Part III of the First Schedule and the territories
referred to in Part III of the Second Schedule to the
Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.] ______________________________________________
1. Entries 8 to 14 renumbered as entries 9 to 15 by the the Bombay Reorganisation Act,
1960 (11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
2. Subs. by the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979 (31 of
1979), s. 5, for the entry against "13. Uttar Pradesh" (w.e.f. 15-9-1983).
3. Ins. by the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (29 of 2000), s. 5 (w.e.f. 9-11-2000).
4. Added by the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, s. 3
(w.e.f. 31-7-2015). For the text of the Act, see Appendix I.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(First Schedule)
 Name Territories
258
1
[2
[** * * *]] 3
[4
[15.]
Nagaland
The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3
of the State of Nagaland Act, 1962.] 3
[5
[16.]
Haryana 6
[The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3
of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 and the
territories specified in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
section 4 of the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration
of Boundaries) Act, 1979, but excluding the territories
specified in clause (v) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of
that Act.]]
 3
[7
[17.]
Himachal
Pradesh
The territories which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution were being
administered as if they were Chief Commissioners’
Provinces under the names of Himachal Pradesh and
Bilaspur and the territories specified in sub-section (1)
of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.] 3
[8
[18.]
Manipur
The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was being
administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner’s
Province under the name of Manipur.] ______________________________________________
1. **Entry 15 relating to Jammu and Kashmir deleted by the Jammu and Kashmir
Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 6 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
2. Entries 8 to 14 renumbered as 9 to 15 by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960
(11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
3. Entries 16 to 29 renumbered as entries 15 to 28 by the Jammu and Kashmir
Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 6 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
4 Ins. by the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 (27 of 1962), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).
5. Ins. by the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966), s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1966)
and the entry therein subsequently amended by the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979 (31 of 1979), s. 5 (w.e.f. 15-9-1983).
6. Subs. by the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979
(31 of 1979), s. 5, for the entry against "17. Haryana" (w.e.f. 15-9-1983).
7. Ins. by the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 (53 of 1970), s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971).
8. Ins. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 9
(w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(First Schedule)
 Name Territories
259
1
[19.] Tripura The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was being
administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner’s
Province under the name of Tripura 2
[and the territories
referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the
Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015,
notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) of
section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act,
1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in
Part II of the First Schedule to the Constitution (One
Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.] 1
[20.] Meghalaya The territories specified in section 5 of the North-Eastern
Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971] 2
[and the territories referred to
in Part I of the First Schedule but excluding the territories
referred to in Part II of the Second Schedule to the Constitution
(One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.] 1
[3
[21.] Sikkim The territories which immediately before the commencement of
the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, were
comprised in Sikkim.] 1
[4
[22.] Mizoram The territories specified in section 6 of the North-Eastern
Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.] 1
[5
[23.] Arunachal
Pradesh
The territories specified in section 7 of the North-Eastern
Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.] 1
[6
[24.] Goa The territories specified in section 3 of the Goa, Daman and
Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987.] ______________________________________________
1. Entries 16 to 29 renumbered as entries 15 to 28 by the Jammu and Kashmir
Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 6 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
2. Added by the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, s. 3
(w.e.f. 31-7-2015). For the text of the Act, see Appendix I. 3. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
4. Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 4 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5. Ins. by the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 4 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
6. Ins. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 5
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(First Schedule)
 Name Territories
260
1
[2
[25.] Chhattisgarh The territories specified in section 3 of the Madhya
Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.] 1
[3
[26.] 4
[Uttarakhand] The territories specified in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, 2000.] 1
[5
[27.] Jharkhand The territories specified in section 3 of the Bihar
Reorganisation Act, 2000.] 1
[6
[28.] Telangana The territories specified in section 3 of the Andhra
Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.]
II. THE UNION TERRITORIES
Name Extent
1. Delhi The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the
Chief Commissioner’s Province of Delhi. 7
[* * * * *] 8
[2.] The Andaman
and Nicobar
Islands
The territory which immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution was comprised in
the Chief Commissioner’s Province of the
Andaman and Nicobar Islands. ______________________________________________
1. Entries 16 to 29 renumbered as entries 15 to 28 by the Jammu and Kashmir
Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 6 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
2. Added by the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (28 of 2000),
s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-11-2000).
3. Ins. by the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (29 of 2000), s. 5 (w.e.f. 9-11-2000).
4. Subs. by the Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (52 of 2006), s. 4, for the
word "Uttaranchal" (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
5. Added by the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 (30 of 2000), s. 5 (w.e.f. 15-11-
2000).
6. Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, s. 10 (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
7. Entry 2 relating to "Himachal Pradesh" omitted and entries 3 to 10 renumbered as
entries 2 to 9 respectively by the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 (53 of 1970),
s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971) and subsequently entries relating to Manipur and Tripura (i.e.
entries 2 and 3) omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81
of 1971) s. 9 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
8. Entries 4 to 9 renumbered as entries 2 to 7 by the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 9 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(First Schedule)
 Name Territories
261
1
[3.] 2
[Lakshadweep] The territory specified in section 6 of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956. 3
[1
[4.] Dadra and
Nagar Haveli
and Daman
and Diu
The territory which immediately before the
eleventh day of August, 1961 was comprised in
Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli and the territories
specified in section 4 of the Goa, Daman and Diu
Reorganisation Act, 1987.] 4
[1
[*]3
[ * * * *] 5
[1
[6.] 6
[Puducherry] The territories which immediately before the
sixteenth day of August, 1962, were comprised in
the French Establishments in India known as
Pondicherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam.] 7
[1
[7.] Chandigarh The territories specified in section 4 of the Punjab
Reorganisation Act, 1966.] ______________________________________________
1. Entries 4 to 9 renumbered as entries 2 to 7 (respectively) by the North-Eastern
Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 9 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Act,
1973 (34 of 1973), s. 5, for "The Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands"
(w.e.f. 1-11-1973).
3. Entry 4 relating to Dadra and Nagar Haveli was ins. by the Constitution (Tenth
Amendment) Act, 1961, s.2 (w.e.f. 11-8-1961). And subsequently subs. by the
Dadra and Nagar Haveli Daman and Diu (Merger of Union territories) Act, 2019
(44 of 2019), s. 5 for entries 4 and 5 (w.e.f. 19-12-2019).
4. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu (Reorganisation) Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 5, for
entry 5 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 3 (with retrospective
effect).
6. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 5 for
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
7. Ins. by the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966), s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1966).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(First Schedule)
 Name Territories
262
1
[* * * * *] 1
[* * * * *] 2
[8. Jammu and
Kashmir
The territories specified in section 4 of the Jammu
and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019.
9. Ladakh The territories specified in section 3 of the Jammu
and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019.]
______________________________________________
1. Entry 8 relating to Mizoram omitted and entry 9 relating to Arunachal Pradesh
renumbered as entry 8 by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 4
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987) and entry 8 relating to Arunachal Pradesh omitted by the State of
Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986) s. 4 (w.e.f. 15-4-1987).
2.Ins. by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019)
s. 6 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
263
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Articles 59(3), 65(3), 75(6), 97, 125, 148(3), 158(3), 164 (5), 186 and 221]
PART A
PROVISIONS AS TO THE PRESIDENT AND THE GOVERNORS OF STATES 1
***
1. There shall be paid to the President and to the Governors of the States 1
*** the following emoluments per mensem, that is to say:—The President …… 10,000 rupees . The Governor of a State …… 5,500 rupees . 2. There shall also be paid to the President and to the Governors of the
States 2
*** such allowances as were payable respectively to the GovernorGeneral of the Dominion of India and to the Governors of the corresponding
Provinces immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.
3. The President and the Governors of 3
[the States] throughout their respective
terms of office shall be entitled to the same privileges to which the GovernorGeneral and the Governors of the corresponding Provinces were respectively
entitled immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.
4. While the Vice-President or any other person is discharging the
functions of, or is acting as, President, or any person is discharging the
functions of the Governor, he shall be entitled to the same emoluments,
allowances and privileges as the President or the Governor whose functions he
discharges or for whom he acts, as the case may be. 4
* * * * *
______________________________________________
1. The words and letter "specified in Part A of the First Schedule" omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
Now five lakh rupees, vide the Finance Act, 2018 (13 of 2018), s. 137.
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
Now three lakh fifty thousand rupees, by s. 161, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
2. The words "so specified" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for "such states" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Part B omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Second Schedule)
264
PART C
PROVISIONS AS TO THE SPEAKER AND THE DEPUTY SPEAKER OF THE HOUSEOF THE PEOPLE AND THE CHAIRMAN AND THE DEPUTY CHAIRMANOF THE COUNCIL OF STATES AND THE SPEAKER AND THEDEPUTY SPEAKER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY1
*** AND THE CHAIRMAN AND THE DEPUTY CHAIRMANOF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF 2
[A STATE]
7. There shall be paid to the Speaker of the House of the People and the
Chairman of the Council of States such salaries and allowances as were payable
to the Speaker of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, and there shall be
paid to the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People and to the Deputy
Chairman of the Council of States such salaries and allowances as were payable
to the Deputy Speaker of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India
immediately before such commencement.
8. There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly 3
*** and to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of
the Legislative Council of 4
[a State] such salaries and allowances as were
payable respectively to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly and the President and the Deputy President of the Legislative
Council of the corresponding Province immediately before the commencement
of this Constitution and, where the corresponding Province had no Legislative
Council immediately before such commencement, there shall be paid to the
Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of the State
such salaries and allowances as the Governor of the State may determine. ______________________________________________
1. The words and letter "OF A STATE IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE"
omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for “ANY SUCH STATE.” (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. The words and letter "of a State specified in Part A of the First Schedule" omitted by
s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for "such State" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Second Schedule)
265
PART D
PROVISIONS AS TO THE JUDGES OF THE SUPREME COURT AND OF THE
HIGH COURTS 1
***
9. [(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the Supreme Court, in respect of
time spent on actual service, salary at the following rates per mensem, that is to say:—The Chief Justice .. 2
[10,000 rupees.].
Any other Judge .. 3
[9,000 rupees.].
Provided that if a Judge of the Supreme Court at the time of his
appointment is in receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound
pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government of India or
any of its predecessor Governments or under the Government of a State or any
of its predecessor Governments, his salary in respect of service in the Supreme
Court 4
[shall be reduced—
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
(b) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of a portion of
the pension due to him in respect of such previous service the commuted
value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension; and
(c) if he has, before such appointment, received a retirement gratuity in
respect of such previous service, by the pension equivalent of that gratuity.]
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be entitled without payment
of rent to the use of an official residence.
(3) Nothing in sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph shall apply to a Judge
who, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution,—______________________________________________
1. The words and letter "IN STATES IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE" omitted
by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 25(a) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 4, for "5,000 rupees
to 10,000 rupees" (w.e.f. 1-4-1986).
Now two lakh eighty thousand rupees, vide the High Court and Supreme Court Judges
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2018 (10 of 2018), s. 6
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 4, for "4,000 rupees"
(w.e.f. 1-4-1986).
Now two lakh fifty thousand rupees, vide the High Court and Supreme Court Judges
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2018 (10 of 2018), s. 6
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 25(b), for " shall be
reduced by the amount of that pension" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Second Schedule)
266
(a) was holding office as the Chief Justice of the Federal Court and
has become on such commencement the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court under clause (1) of article 374; or
(b) was holding office as any other Judge of the Federal Court and
has on such commencement become a Judge (other than the Chief
Justice) of the Supreme Court under the said clause,
during the period he holds office as such Chief Justice or other Judge, and
every Judge who so becomes the Chief Justice or other Judge of the Supreme
Court shall, in respect of time spent on actual service as such Chief Justice or
other Judge, as the case may be, be entitled to receive in addition to the salary
specified in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph as special pay an amount
equivalent to the difference between the salary so specified and the salary
which he was drawing immediately before such commencement.
(4) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall receive such reasonable
allowances to reimburse him for expenses incurred in travelling on duty within
the territory of India and shall be afforded such reasonable facilities in
connection with travelling as the President may from time to time prescribe.
(5) The rights in respect of leave of absence (including leave allowances)
and pension of the Judges of the Supreme Court shall be governed by the
provisions which, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution,
were applicable to the Judges of the Federal Court.
10. (1) 1
[There shall be paid to the Judges of High Courts, in respect of time
spent on actual service, salary at the following rates per mensem, that is to say,—The Chief Justice .. 2
[9,000 rupees]
Any other Judge .. 3
[8,000 rupees]: ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 25(c), (i), for
sub-paragraph (1) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 4, for "4,000 rupees"
(w.e.f. 1-4-1986).
Now two lakh fifty thousand rupees, vide the High Court and Supreme Court Judges
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2018 (10 of 2018), s. 2
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 4, for "3,500 rupees"
(w.e.f. 1-4-1986).
Now two lakh twenty-five thousand rupees, vide the High Court and Supreme Court
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2018 (10 of 2018), s. 2
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Second Schedule)
267
Provided that if a Judge of a High Court at the time of his appointment is in
receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any
previous service under the Government of India or any of its predecessor
Governments or under the Government of a State or any of its predecessor
Governments, his salary in respect of service in the High Court shall be reduced—(a) by the amount of that pension; and
(b) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of a portion of
the pension due to him in respect of such previous service the commuted
value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension; and
(c) if he has, before such appointment, received a retirement gratuity in
respect of such previous service, by the pension equivalent of that
gratuity.]
(2) Every person who immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution—
(a) was holding office as the Chief Justice of a High Court in any
Province and has on such commencement become the Chief Justice of the
High Court in the corresponding State under clause (1) of article 376; or
(b) was holding office as any other Judge of a High Court in any Province
and has on such commencement become a Judge (other than the Chief
Justice) of the High Court in the corresponding State under the said clause,
shall, if he was immediately before such commencement drawing a salary at a
rate higher than that specified in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, be
entitled to receive in respect of time spent on actual service as such Chief
Justice or other Judge, as the case may be, in addition to the salary specified in
the said sub-paragraph as special pay an amount equivalent to the difference
between the salary so specified and the salary which he was drawing
immediately before such commencement. 1
[(3) Any person who, immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, was holding office as the Chief
Justice of the High Court of a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule
and has on such commencement become the Chief Justice of the High Court of
a State specified in the said Schedule as amended by the said Act, shall, if he
was immediately before such commencement drawing any amount as
allowance in addition to his salary, be entitled to receive in respect of time
spent on actual service as such Chief Justice, the same amount as allowance in
addition to the salary specified in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph.]. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 25(c), (ii), for
sub-paragraphs (3) and (4) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Second Schedule)
268
11. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—(a) the expression “Chief Justice” includes an acting Chief Justice,
and a “Judge” includes an ad hoc Judge;
(b) “actual service” includes—
(i) time spent by a Judge on duty as a Judge or in the performance
of such other functions as he may at the request of the President
undertake to discharge;
(ii) vacations, excluding any time during which the Judge is absent
on leave; and
(iii) joining time on transfer from a High Court to the Supreme
Court or from one High Court to another.
PART E
PROVISIONS AS TO THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL OF INDIA12. (1) There shall be paid to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India a salary at the rate of *four thousand rupees per mensem.
(2) The person who was holding office immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution as Auditor-General of India and has
become on such commencement the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
under article 377 shall in addition to the salary specified in sub-paragraph (1) of
this paragraph be entitled to receive as special pay an amount equivalent to the
difference between the salary so specified and the salary which he was drawing
as Auditor-General of India immediately before such commencement.
(3) The rights in respect of leave of absence and pension and the other
conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall be
governed or shall continue to be governed, as the case may be, by the provisions
which were applicable to the Auditor-General of India immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution and all references in those provisions to the
Governor-General shall be construed as references to the President. ______________________________________________
* The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall be paid a salary equal to
the salary of the Judges of the Supreme Court vide s. 3 of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (56 of
1971) . The salary of Judges of the Supreme Court has been raised to two
lakh fifty thousand rupees per mensem by the High Court and Supreme Court
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2018 (10 of 2018), s. 6
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
269
THIRD SCHEDULE
[Articles 75(4), 99, 124(6), 148(2), 164(3), 188 and 219] Forms of Oaths or Affirmations
I
Form of oath of office for a Minister for the Union:—“I, A. B., do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith
 solemnly affirm
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, 1
[that I
will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will faithfully
and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the Union and
that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the
Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”
II
Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for the Union:—“I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will not directly or
solemnly affirm
indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter
which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known
to me as a Minister for the Union except as may be required for the due
discharge of my duties as such Minister.” 2
[III
A
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to
Parliament:—
______________________________________________
See also arts. 84 (a) and 173 (a).
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for Form III. (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Third Schedule)
270
“I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the
Council of States (or the House of the People) do swear in the name of God
solemnly affirmthat I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as
by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of
India.”
B
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of Parliament:—“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the
Council of States (or the House of the People) do swear in the name of God
 solemnly affirmthat I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to
enter.”]
IV
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the Supreme
Court and the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India:—“I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the
Supreme Court of India (or Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India) do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and
solemnly affirm
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, 1
[that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will
duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and
judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour,
affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.” ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Third Schedule)
271
V
Form of oath of office for a Minister for a State:—“I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith
solemnly affirm
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, 1
[that I
will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will faithfully
and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the State of
..........and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with
the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”
VI
Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for a State:—
 “I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will not directly or
 solemnly affirm
indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter
which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to
me as a Minister for the State of ....................except as may be required for
the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.” 2
[VII
A
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to the
Legislature of a State:—
“I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill
a seat in the Legislative Assembly (or Legislative Council),
do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and
solemnly affirm
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I
will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.” ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for Form VII (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Third Schedule)
272
B
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature
of a State:—
“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative
Assembly (or Legislative Council), do swear in the name of God that
solemnly affirmI will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India
and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to
enter.”]
VIII
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of a High Court:—“I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the High
Court at (or of) ……….….. do swear in the name of God that I will bear
solemnly affirmtrue faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law
established, 1
[that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that
I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and
judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection
or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.”
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
273
1
[FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)]
Allocation of seats in the Council of States
To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of the
following table, there shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the
second column thereof opposite to that State or that Union territory, as the case
may be:
TABLE
 1. Andhra Pradesh .......................................................... 2
[11] 3
[2. Telangana ................................................................ 7] 4
[3.] Assam ........................................................................ 7
4
[4.] Bihar .......................................................................... 5
[16] 6
[4
[5.] Jharkhand ................................................................ 6] 7
[8
[4
[6.] Goa ............................................................................1]] 9
[8
[4
[7.] Gujarat ................................................................ 11]] 10[8
[4
[8.] Haryana ................................................................ 5]] 8
[4
[9.] Kerala ........................................................................ 9
______________________________________________
1. Fourth Schedule Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3(2),
for ‘Fourth Schedule’ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, s. 12, for “18” (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
3. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
4. Entries 2 to 30 renumbered as entries 3 to 31 respectively by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
5. Subs. by the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 (30 of 2000), s. 7, for "22" (w.e.f. 15-11-2000).
6. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-11-2000).
7. Entries 4 to 26 renumbered as entries 5 to 27 respectively and entry “4 Goa….1” ins.
by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 6(a) and (b)
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
8. Entries 4 to 29 renumbered as entries 5 to 30 by the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000
(30 of 2000), s. 7 (w.e.f. 15-11-2000).
9. Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 6, for entry "4"
(w.e.f.1-5-1960).
10. Ins. by the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966), s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-11-1966).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Fourth Schedule)
274
1
[2
[10.]] Madhya Pradesh ......................................................... 3
[11] 4
[1
[2
[11.] Chhattisgarh ...............................................................5]] 5
[1
[2
[12.] Tamil Nadu ................................................................ 6
[18]] 7
[1
[2
[13.] Maharashtra ...............................................................19]] 8
[1
[2
[14.] Karnataka ................................................................ 12]] 1
[2
[15.] 9
[Odisha] ................................................................ 10] 1
[2
[16.] Punjab ........................................................................ 10[7] 1
[2
[17.] Rajasthan ................................................................ 10] 1
[2
[18.] Uttar Pradesh .............................................................. 11[31] 12[1
[2
[19.] 13[Uttarakhand] ...........................................................3]] 1
[2
[20.] West Bengal ...............................................................16] 14[1
[2
[** * * *............................................................. *] 15[16[1
[2
[21.] Nagaland ................................................................ 1]] ______________________________________________
1. Entries 4 to 29 renumbered as entries 5 to 30 by the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000
(30 of 2000), s. 7 (w.e.f. 15-11-2000).
2. Entries 2 to 30 renumbered as entries 3 to 31 respectively by the Andhra Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, 2014, s. 12 (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
3. Subs. by the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (28 of 2000), s. 7, for "16"
(w.e.f. 1-11-2000).
4. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-2000).
5. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 5, for "8.
Madras" (renumbered as *11) (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).
6. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959
(56 of 1959), s. 8, for "17" (w.e.f. 1-4-1960).
7. Ins. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
8. Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (31 of 1973), s. 5, for "10.
Mysore" (w.e.f. 1-11-1973).
9. Subs. by the Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011 (15 of 2011), s. 7 for "Orissa"
(w.e.f. 1-11-2011).
10. Subs. by the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966), s. 9 for "11"
(w.e.f. 1-11-1966).
11. Subs. by the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (29 of 2000), s. 7 for "34"
(w.e.f. 9-11-2000).
12. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-11-2000).
13. Subs. by the Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (52 of 2006), s. 5 for
"Uttaranchal" (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
14. ** Entry 21 relating to Jammu and Kashmir deleted by the Jammu and Kashmir
Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 8 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
15. Entries 22 to 31 re-numbered as entries 21 to 30, respectively by the Jammu and
Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 8 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
16. Ins. by the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 (27 of 1962), s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Fourth Schedule)
275
1
[2
[3
[4
[22.] Himachal Pradesh .......................................................3]]] 3
[2
[4
[23.] Manipur ................................................................ 1] 3
[2
[4
[24.] Tripura ................................................................ 1]] 3
[2
[4
[25.] Meghalaya ................................................................1]] 5
[3
[2
[4
[26.] Sikkim ................................................................ 1]] 6
[3
[2
[4
[27.] Mizoram ................................................................ 1]] 7
[3
[2
[4
[28.] Arunachal Pradesh ......................................................1]] 3
[2
[4
[29.] Delhi .......................................................................... 3] 3
[2
[4
[30.] 8
[Puducherry] .............................................................1]] 9
[3
[2
[4
[31. Jammu and Kashmir.................................................... 4]
Total 10[233]
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 (53 of 1970), s. 5 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971).
2. Entries 4 to 29 renumbered as entries 5 to 30 by the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000
(30 of 2000), s. 7 (w.e.f. 15-11-2000).
3. Entries 2 to 30 renumbered as entries 3 to 31 respectively by the Andhra Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, 2014 (6 of 2014), s. 12 (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
4. Entries 22 to 31 renumbered as entries 21 to 30 respectively by the Jammu and
Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 8 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amenement) Act, 1975, s. 4 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
6. Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 5 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
7. Ins. by the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 5 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
8. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006) s. 4, for
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
9. Ins. by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 8
(w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
10. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 6, for
"232" (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
276
FIFTH SCHEDULE
[Article 244(1)]
Provisions as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and
Scheduled Tribes
PART A
GENERAL
1. Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise
requires, the expression “State” 1
*** does not include the 2
[States of Assam3
[, 4
[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.]]]
2. Executive power of a State in Scheduled Areas.—Subject to the
provisions of this Schedule, the executive power of a State extends to the
Scheduled Areas therein.
3. Report by the Governor 5
*** to the President regarding the
administration of Scheduled Areas.—The Governor 5
*** of each State having
Scheduled Areas therein shall annually, or whenever so required by the President,
make a report to the President regarding the administration of the Scheduled
Areas in that State and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the
giving of directions to the State as to the administration of the said areas.
PART B
ADMINISTRATION AND CONTROL OF SCHEDULED AREAS AND
SCHEDULED TRIBES
4. Tribes Advisory Council.—(1) There shall be established in each
State having Scheduled Areas therein and, if the President so directs, also in
any State having Scheduled Tribes but not Scheduled Areas therein, a Tribes
Advisory Council consisting of not more than twenty members of whom, as
nearly as may be, three-fourths shall be the representatives of the Scheduled
Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State: ______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "means a State specified in Part A or Part B of the First
Schedule but" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and
Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
"State of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 3, for "and
Meghalaya" (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
4. Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for "Meghalaya and
Tripura" (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Fifth Schedule)
277
Provided that if the number of representatives of the Scheduled Tribes in
the Legislative Assembly of the State is less than the number of seats in the
Tribes Advisory Council to be filled by such representatives, the remaining
seats shall be filled by other members of those tribes.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Tribes Advisory Council to advise on such
matters pertaining to the welfare and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes in
the State as may be referred to them by the Governor 1
***.
(3) The Governor 2
*** may make rules prescribing or regulating, as the
case may be,—
(a) the number of members of the Council, the mode of their
appointment and the appointment of the Chairman of the Council and of
the officers and servants thereof;
(b) the conduct of its meetings and its procedure in general; and
(c) all other incidental matters.
5. Law applicable to Scheduled Areas.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
in this Constitution, the Governor 1
*** may by public notification direct that
any particular Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall not
apply to a Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State or shall apply to a
Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State subject to such exceptions and
modifications as he may specify in the notification and any direction given
under this sub-paragraph may be given so as to have retrospective effect.
(2) The Governor may make regulations for the peace and good
government of any area in a State which is for the time being a Scheduled Area.
In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such regulations may—
(a) prohibit or restrict the transfer of land by or among members
of the Scheduled Tribes in such area;
(b) regulate the allotment of land to members of the Scheduled
Tribes in such area; ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh, as the case may be" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Fifth Schedule)
278
(c) regulate the carrying on of business as money-lender by
persons who lend money to members of the Scheduled Tribes in such area. (3) In making any such regulation as is referred to in sub-paragraph (2)
of this paragraph, the Governor 1
*** may repeal or amend any Act of
Parliament or of the Legislature of the State or any existing law which is for the
time being applicable to the area in question.
(4) All regulations made under this paragraph shall be submitted
forthwith to the President and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.
(5) No regulation shall be made under this paragraph unless the
Governor21
*** making the regulation has, in the case where there is a Tribes
Advisory Council for the State, consulted such Council.
PART C
SCHEDULED AREAS
6. Scheduled Areas.—(1) In this Constitution, the expression
“Scheduled Areas” means such areas as the President may by order declare to
be Scheduled Areas.
(2) The President may at any time by order —(a) direct that the whole or any specified part of a Scheduled Area
shall cease to be a Scheduled Area or a part of such an area; 2
[(aa) increase the area of any Scheduled Area in a State after
consultation with the Governor of that State;]
(b) alter, but only by way of rectification of boundaries, any
Scheduled Area; ______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by s. 29 and sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
See the Scheduled Areas (Part A States) Order, 1950 (C.O. 9), the Scheduled Areas
(Part B States) Order, 1950 (C.O.26), the Scheduled Areas (Himachal Pradesh) Order,
1975 (C.O. 102) and the Scheduled Areas (States of Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh
and Orissa) Order, 1977 (C.O. 109).
See the Madras Scheduled Areas (Cessor) Order, 1950 (C.O. 30) and the Andhra
Scheduled Areas (Cessor) Order, 1955 (C.O. 50).
2. Ins. by the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1976 (101 of 1976),
s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-1976).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Fifth Schedule)
279
(c) on any alteration of the boundaries of a State or on the
admission into the Union or the establishment of a new State, declare
any territory not previously included in any State to be, or to form part
of, a Scheduled Area; 1
[(d) rescind, in relation to any State or States, any order or orders
made under this paragraph, and in consultation with the Governor of the
State concerned, make fresh orders redefining the areas which are to be
Scheduled Areas;]
and any such order may contain such incidental and consequential provisions as
appear to the President to be necessary and proper, but save as aforesaid, the
order made under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall not be varied by
any subsequent order.
PART D
AMENDMENT OF THE SCHEDULE
7. Amendment of the Schedule.—(1) Parliament may from time to time
by law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of
this Schedule and, when the Schedule is so amended, any reference to this
Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a reference to such Schedule
as so amended.
(2) No such law as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph
shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1976 (101 of 1976),
s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-1976).
280
SIXTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 244(2) and 275(1)]
Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in 1
[the States of
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram] 2
1. Autonomous districts and autonomous regions.—(1) Subject to
the provisions of this paragraph, the tribal areas in each item of 3
[4
[Parts I, II
and IIA] and in Part III] of the table appended to paragraph 20 of this
Schedule shall be an autonomous district.
(2) If there are different Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous district,
the Governor may, by public notification, divide the area or areas inhabited
by them into autonomous regions.
(3) The Governor may, by public notification,—(a) include any area in 3
[any of the Parts] of the said table;
(b) exclude any area from 3
[any of the Parts] of the said table;
(c) create a new autonomous district;
(d) increase the area of any autonomous district;
(e) diminish the area of any autonomous district;
(f) unite two or more autonomous districts or parts thereof so
as to form one autonomous district; 5
[(ff) alter the name of any autonomous district];
(g) define the boundaries of any autonomous district: ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for certain words
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
2. Paragraph 1 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2, so as to
insert the following proviso after sub-paragraph (2), namely :—"Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland
Territorial Areas District" (w.e.f. 7-9-2003).
3. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for "Part A" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4, for "Part I and
II" (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
5. Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
281
Provided that no order shall be made by the Governor under clauses (c),
(d), (e) and (f) of this sub-paragraph except after consideration of the report of
a Commission appointed under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14 of this
Schedule: 1
[Provided further that any order made by the Governor under this
sub-paragraph may contain such incidental and consequential provisions
(including any amendment of paragraph 20 and of any item in any of the
Parts of the said Table) as appear to the Governor to be necessary for giving
effect to the provisions of the order.] 2
2. Constitution of District Councils and Regional Councils.—3
[(1) There shall be a District Council for each autonomous district
consisting of not more than thirty members, of whom not more than four
persons shall be nominated by the Governor and the rest shall be elected on
the basis of adult suffrage.] ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and
Eighth Sch. (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Paragraph 2 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003(44 of 2003), s. 2, so as to insert
the following proviso after sub-paragraph (1), namely: —“Provided that the Bodoland Territorial Council shall consist of not more than
forty-six members of whom forty shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage, of
whom thirty shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes, five for non-tribal
communities, five open for all communities and the remaining six shall be nominated
by the Governor having same rights and privileges as other members, including voting
rights, from amongst the un-represented communities of the Bodoland Territorial
Areas District, of which at least two shall be women:”
Paragraph 2 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995(42 of 1995), s.2, so as to insert the
following proviso after sub-paragraph (3), namely :—“Provided that the District Council constituted for the North Cachar Hills
District shall be called as the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the
District Council constituted for the Karbi Anglong District shall be called as the
Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council.”
Paragraph 2 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003(44 of 2003), s. 2, so as to insert
the following proviso after sub-paragraph (3), namely:—“Provided further that the District Council constituted for the Bodoland
Territorial Areas District shall be called the Bodoland Territorial Council.”
3. Subs. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and
Fourth Sch., for sub-paraghaph (1) (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
282
(2) There shall be a separate Regional Council for each area
constituted an autonomous region under sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 of
this Schedule.
(3) Each District Council and each Regional Council shall be a body
corporate by the name respectively of “the District Council of (name of
district)” and “the Regional Council of (name of region)”, shall have
perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and
be sued.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the administration of
an autonomous district shall, in so far as it is not vested under this Schedule
in any Regional Council within such district, be vested in the District
Council for such district and the administration of an autonomous region
shall be vested in the Regional Council for such region.
(5) In an autonomous district with Regional Councils, the District
Council shall have only such powers with respect to the areas under the
authority of the Regional Council as may be delegated to it by the Regional
Council in addition to the powers conferred on it by this Schedule with
respect to such areas.
(6) The Governor shall make rules for the first constitution of District
Councils and Regional Councils in consultation with the existing tribal
Councils or other representative tribal organisations within the autonomous
districts or regions concerned, and such rules shall provide for—(a) the composition of the District Councils and Regional
Councils and the allocation of seats therein;
(b) the delimitation of territorial constituencies for the purpose
of elections to those Councils;
(c) the qualifications for voting at such elections and the
preparation of electoral rolls therefor;
(d) the qualifications for being elected at such elections as
members of such Councils;
(e) the term of office of members of 1
[Regional Councils]; ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and
Fourth Sch., for "such Councils" (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
283
(f) any other matter relating to or connected with elections or
nominations to such Councils;
(g) the procedure and the conduct of business 1
[(including the
power to act notwithstanding any vacancy)] in the District and
Regional Councils;
(h) the appointment of officers and staff of the District and
Regional Councils. 1
[(6A) The elected members of the District Council shall hold office
for a term of five years from the date appointed for the first meeting of the
Council after the general elections to the Council, unless the District
Council is sooner dissolved under paragraph 16 and a nominated member
shall hold office at the pleasure of the Governor:
Provided that the said period of five years may, while a Proclamation
of Emergency is in operation or if circumstances exist which, in the opinion
of the Governor, render the holding of elections impracticable, be extended
by the Governor for a period not exceeding one year at a time and in any
case where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation not extending
beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate:
Provided further that a member elected to fill a casual vacancy shall
hold office only for the remainder of the term of office of the member
whom he replaces.]
(7) The District or the Regional Council may after its first
constitution make rules 1
[with the approval of the Governor] with regard to
the matters specified in sub-paragraph (6) of this paragraph and may also
make rules 1
[with like approval] regulating—(a) the formation of subordinate local Councils or Boards and
their procedure and the conduct of their business; and
(b) generally all matters relating to the transaction of business
pertaining to the administration of the district or region, as the case
may be: ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
284
Provided that until rules are made by the District or the Regional
Council under this sub-paragraph the rules made by the Governor under
sub-paragraph (6) of this paragraph shall have effect in respect of elections
to, the officers and staff of, and the procedure and the conduct of business
in, each such Council. 1
* * * * 2-32
3. Powers of the District Councils and Regional Councils to
make laws.—(1) The Regional Council for an autonomous region in ______________________________________________
1. Second proviso omitted by s. 74 and Fourth Sch. of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya)
Act, 1969 (55 of 1969) (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
2. Paragraph 3 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2, so as to substitute sub-paragraph (3) as
under (w.e.f. 7-9-2003),—
“(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3A or sub-paragraph
(2) of paragraph 3B, all laws made under this paragraph or sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3A
or sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3B shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until
assented to by him, shall have no effect.” .
After paragraph 3, the following paragraph has been inserted in its application to the State of
Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2,
(w.e.f. 12-9-1995), namely: —
“3A. Additional powers of the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the
Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council to make laws.—(1) Without prejudice to the
provisions of paragraph 3, the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi
Anglong Autonomous Council within their respective districts, shall have power to make
laws with respect to—
(a) industries, subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I of the Seventh
Schedule;
 (b) communications, that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries and other means of
communication not specified in List I of the Seventh Schedule; municipal tramways,
ropeways, inland waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List I and
List III of the Seventh Schedule with regard to such waterways; vehicles other than
mechanically propelled vehicles;
(c) preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal
diseases; veterinary training and practice; cattle pounds;
(d) primary and secondary education;
(e) agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pests
and prevention of plant diseases;
(f) fisheries; 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
285
(Foot-note Continue),—
(g) water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of
List I of the Seventh Schedule;
(h) social security and social insurance; employment and unemployment;
(i) flood control schemes for protection of villages, paddy fields, markets, towns, etc.
(not of technical nature);
(j) theatre and dramatic performances, cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 60 of
List I of the Seventh Schedule; sports, entertainments and amusements;
(k) public health and sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries;
(l) minor irrigation;
(m) trade and commerce in, and the production supply and distribution of, food stuffs,
cattle fodder, raw cotton and raw jute;
(n) libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed by the State;
ancient and historical monuments and records other than those declared by or under
any law made by Parliament to be of national importance; and
(o) alienation of land.
(2) All laws made by the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong
Autonomous Council under paragraph 3 or under this paragraph shall, in so far as they relate to
matters specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule, be submitted forthwith to the Governor
who shall reserve the same for the consideration of the President.
(3) When a law is reserved for the consideration of the President, the President shall declare
either that he assents to the said law or that he withholds assent therefrom:
Provided that the President may direct the Governor to return the law to the North Cachar
Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council, as the case may be,
together with a message requesting that the said Council will reconsider the law or any
specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will, consider the desirability of introducing any
such amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when the law is so returned, the
said Council shall consider the law accordingly within a period of six months from the date of
receipt of such message and, if the law is again passed by the said Council with or without
amendment it shall be presented again to the President for his consideration.".
After paragraph 3A, the following paragraph has been inserted in its application to the State of Assam
by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2, (w.e.f. 7-9-
2003), namely:—
3B. Additional powers of the Bodoland Territorial Council to make laws.—(1) Without
prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 3, the Bodoland Territorial Council within its areas
shall have power to make laws with respect to :—
(i) agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against
pests and prevention of plant diseases; (ii) animal husbandry and veterinary, that is to say,
preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases,
veterinary training and practice, cattle pounds; (iii) co-operation; (iv) cultural affairs; (v)
education, that is to say, primary education, higher secondary including vocational training,
adult education, college education (general); (vi) fisheries; (vii) flood control for protection
of village, paddy fields, markets and towns (not of technical nature); (viii) Food and civil 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
286
supply; (ix) forests (other than reserved forests); (x) handloom and textile; (xi) health and
family welfare, (xii) intoxicating liquors, opium and derivatives, subject to the provisions of
entry 84 of List I of the Seventh Schedule; (xiii) irrigation; (xiv) labour and employment;
(xv) land and revenue; (xvi) library services (financed and controlled by the State
Government); (xvii) lotteries (subject to the provisions of entry 40 of List I of the Seventh
Schedule), theatres, dramatic performances and cinemas (subject to the provisions of entry
60 of List I of the Seventh Schedule); (xviii) markets and fairs; (xix) municipal corporation,
improvement trust, district boards and other local authorities; (xx) museum and
archaeology institutions controlled or financed by the State, ancient and historical
monuments and records other than those declared by or under any law made by Parliament
to be of national importance; (xxi) panchayat and rural development; (xxii) planning and
development; (xxiii) printing and stationery; (xxiv) public health engineering; (xxv) public
works department; (xxvi) publicity and public relations; (xxvii) registration of births and
deaths; (xxviii) relief and rehabilitation; (xxix) sericulture; (xxx) small, cottage and rural
industry subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I of the Seventh Schedule;
(xxxi) social Welfare; (xxxii) soil conservation; (xxxiii) sports and youth welfare;
(xxxiv) statistics; (xxxv) tourism; (xxxvi) transport (roads, bridges, ferries and other
means of communications not specified in List I of the Seventh Schedule, municipal
tramways, ropeways, inland waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provision of List
I and List III of the Seventh Schedule with regard to such waterways, vehicles other than
mechanically propelled vehicles); (xxxvii) tribal research institute controlled and financed
by the State Government; (xxxviii) urban development—town and country planning;
(xxxix) weights and measures subject to the provisions of entry 50 of List I of the Seventh
Schedule; and (xl) Welfare of plain tribes and backward classes:
Provided that nothing in such laws shall—(a) extinguish or modify the existing rights and privileges of any citizen
in respect of his land at the date of commencement of this Act; and
(b) disallow and citizen from acquiring land either by way of inheritance,
allotment, settlement or by any other way of transfer if such citizen is otherwise
eligible for such acquisition of land within the Bodoland Territorial Areas
District.
(2) All laws made under paragraph 3 or under this paragraph shall in so far as they
relate to matters specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule, be submitted forthwith to the
Governor who shall reserve the same for the consideration of the President.
(3) When a law is reserved for the consideration of the President, the President shall
declare either that he assents to the said law or that he withholds assent therefrom:
Provided that the President may direct the Governor to return the law to the
Bodoland Territorial Council, together with the message requesting that the said Council
will reconsider the law or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider
the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message
and, when the law is so returned, the said Council shall consider the law accordingly within
a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if the law is again
passed by the said Council with or without amendments it shall be presented again to the
President for his consideration.”.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
287
respect of all areas within such region and the District Council for an
autonomous district in respect of all areas within the district except those
which are under the authority of Regional Councils, if any, within the
district shall have power to make laws with respect to—(a) the allotment, occupation or use, or the setting apart, of
land, other than any land which is a reserved forest for the purposes
of agriculture or grazing or for residential or other non-agricultural
purposes or for any other purpose likely to promote the interests of
the inhabitants of any village or town:
Provided that nothing in such laws shall prevent the
compulsory acquisition of any land, whether occupied or unoccupied,
for public purposes 1
[by the Government of the State concerned] in
accordance with the law for the time being in force authorising such
acquisition;
(b) the management of any forest not being a reserved forest;
(c) the use of any canal or water-course for the purpose of
agriculture;
(d) the regulation of the practice of jhum or other forms of
shifting cultivation;
(e) the establishment of village or town committees or councils
and their powers;
(f) any other matter relating to village or town administration,
including village or town police and public health and sanitation;
(g) the appointment or succession of Chiefs or Headmen;
(h) the inheritance of property; 2
[(i) marriage and divorce;]
(j) social customs.
(2) In this paragraph, a “reserved forest” means any area which is a
reserved forest under the Assam Forest Regulation, 1891, or under any other
law for the time being in force in the area in question. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Subs. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and
Fourth Sch., for cl. (i) (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
288
(3) All laws made under this paragraph shall be submitted forthwith
to the Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect. 1
4. Administration of justice in autonomous districts and
autonomous regions.—(1) The Regional Council for an autonomous region
in respect of areas within such region and the District Council for an
autonomous district in respect of areas within the district other than those
which are under the authority of the Regional Councils, if any, within the
district may constitute village councils or courts for the trial of suits and
cases between the parties all of whom belong to Scheduled Tribes within
such areas, other than suits and cases to which the provisions of
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 5 of this Schedule apply, to the exclusion
of any court in the State, and may appoint suitable persons to be members of
such village councils or presiding officers of such courts, and may also
appoint such officers as may be necessary for the administration of the laws
made under paragraph 3 of this Schedule.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Regional
Council for an autonomous region or any court constituted in that behalf by
the Regional Council or, if in respect of any area within an autonomous
district there is no Regional Council, the District Council for such district,
or any court constituted in that behalf by the District Council, shall exercise
the powers of a court of appeal in respect of all suits and cases triable by a
village council or court constituted under sub-paragraph (1) of this
paragraph within such region or area, as the case may be, other than those to
which the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 5 of this Schedule
apply, and no other court except the High Court and the Supreme Court
shall have jurisdiction over such suits or cases.
(3) The High Court 2
*** shall have and exercise such jurisdiction
over the suits and cases to which the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this
paragraph apply as the Governor may from time to time by order specify. ______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 4 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2, (w.e.f. 7-9-2003)
so as to insert the following sub-paragraph after sub-paragraph (5), namely:—“(6) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial Council
constituted under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this Schedule.” .
2. The words "of Assam" omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971
(81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch. (w.e.f. 21-1-1972). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
289
(4) A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may
with the previous approval of the Governor make rules regulating —(a) the constitution of village councils and courts and the
powers to be exercised by them under this paragraph;
(b) the procedure to be followed by village councils or courts in
the trial of suits and cases under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph;
(c) the procedure to be followed by the Regional or District
Council or any court constituted by such Council in appeals and other
proceedings under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph;
(d) the enforcement of decisions and orders of such councils
and courts;
(e) all other ancillary matters for the carrying out of the
provisions of sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph. 1
[(5) On and from such date as the President may, 2
[after consulting the
Government of the State concerned], by notification appoint in this behalf, this
paragraph shall have effect in relation to such autonomous district or region as
may be specified in the notification, as if—(i) in sub-paragraph (1), for the words “between the parties all of
whom belong to Scheduled Tribes within such areas, other than suits
and cases to which the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 5
of this Schedule apply,”, the words “not being suits and cases of the
nature referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph (5) of this
Schedule, which the Governor may specify in this behalf,” had been
substituted;
(ii) sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) had been omitted;
(iii) in sub-paragraph (4)—(a) for the words “A Regional Council or District
Council, as the case may be, may with the previous approval of
the Governor make rules regulating”, the words “the Governor
may make rules regulating” had been substituted; and
(b) for clause (a), the following clause had been
substituted, namely:—______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
290
“(a) the constitution of village councils and courts,
the powers to be exercised by them under this paragraph
and the courts to which appeals from the decisions of
village councils and courts shall lie;”;
(c) for clause (c), the following clause had been
substituted, namely:—“(c) the transfer of appeals and other proceedings
pending before the Regional or District Council or any
court constituted by such Council immediately before the
date appointed by the President under sub-paragraph
(5);”; and
(d) in clause (e), for the words, brackets and figures
“sub-paragraphs (1) and (2)”, the word, brackets and figure
“sub-paragraph (1)” had been substituted.]
5. Conferment of powers under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18981
, on the Regional and
District Councils and on certain courts and officers for the trial of
certain suits, cases and offences.—(1) The Governor may, for the trial of
suits or cases arising out of any law in force in any autonomous district or
region being a law specified in that behalf by the Governor, or for the trial
of offences punishable with death, transportation for life, or imprisonment
for a term of not less than five years under the Indian Penal Code or under
any other law for the time being applicable to such district or region, confer
on the District Council or the Regional Council having authority over such
district or region or on courts constituted by such District Council or on any
officer appointed in that behalf by the Governor, such powers under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or, as the case may be, the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 18981
, as he deems appropriate, and thereupon the said Council,
court or officer shall try the suits, cases or offences in exercise of the
powers so conferred.
(2) The Governor may withdraw or modify any of the powers
conferred on a District Council, Regional Council, court or officer under
sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph.
(3) Save as expressly provided in this paragraph, the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18981
, shall not
apply to the trial of any suits, cases or offences in an autonomous district or
in any autonomous region to which the provisions of this paragraph apply. ______________________________________________
1. See the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
291
1
[(4) On and from the date appointed by the President under
sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 4 in relation to any autonomous district or
autonomous region, nothing contained in this paragraph shall, in its
application to that district or region, be deemed to authorise the Governor to
confer on the District Council or Regional Council or on courts constituted
by the District Council any of the powers referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of
this paragraph.] 2
[6. Powers of the District Council to establish primary schools,
etc.— (1) The District Council for an autonomous district may establish,
construct, or manage primary schools, dispensaries, markets, 3
[cattle
pounds], ferries, fisheries, roads, road transport and waterways in the district
and may, with the previous approval of the Governor, make regulations for
the regulation and control thereof and, in particular, may prescribe the
language and the manner in which primary education shall be imparted in
the primary schools in the district.
(2) The Governor may, with the consent of any District Council,
entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that Council or to its
officers functions in relation to agriculture, animal husbandry, community
projects, co-operative societies, social welfare, village planning or any other
matter to which the executive power of the State 4
*** extends.
7. District and Regional Funds.—(1) There shall be constituted for
each autonomous district, a District Fund and for each autonomous region, a
Regional Fund to which shall be credited all moneys received respectively
by the District Council for that district and the Regional Council for that
region in the course of the administration of such district or region, as the
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
2. Subs. by s. 74 and Fourth Sch., ibid. for "paragraph 6" (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
3. Subs. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1974 (56 of 1974), s. 4, for "cattle
ponds" (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).
4. The words "of Assam or Meghalaya, as the case may be," omitted by the NorthEastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch.
(w.e.f. 21-1-1972). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
292
1
[(2) The Governor may make rules for the management of the
District Fund, or, as the case may be, the Regional Fund and for the
procedure to be followed in respect of payment of money into the said Fund,
the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of moneys therein and any
other matter connected with or ancillary to the matters aforesaid.
(3) The accounts of the District Council or, as the case may be, the
Regional Council shall be kept in such form as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India may, with the approval of the President, prescribe.
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall cause the accounts of
the District and Regional Councils to be audited in such manner as he may
think fit, and the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General relating to
such accounts shall be submitted to the Governor who shall cause them to
be laid before the Council.]
8. Powers to assess and collect land revenue and to impose
taxes.—(1) The Regional Council for an autonomous region in respect of all
lands within such region and the District Council for an autonomous district
in respect of all lands within the district except those which are in the areas
under the authority of Regional Councils, if any, within the district, shall
have the power to assess and collect revenue in respect of such lands in
accordance with the principles for the time being followed 2
[by the
Government of the State in assessing lands for the purpose of land revenue
in the State generally.]
(2) The Regional Council for an autonomous region in respect of areas
within such region and the District Council for an autonomous district in
respect of all areas in the district except those which are under the authority of
Regional Councils, if any, within the district, shall have power to levy and
collect taxes on lands and buildings, and tolls on persons resident within such areas. (3) The District Council for an autonomous district shall have the power to
levy and collect all or any of the following taxes within such district, that is to
say —
(a) taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments;
(b) taxes on animals, vehicles and boats; ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and
Fourth Sch., for sub-paragraph (2) (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 21-1-1972). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
293
(c) taxes on the entry of goods into a market for sale therein,
and tolls on passengers and goods carried in ferries; 1
***
(d) taxes for the maintenance of schools, dispensaries or roads; 2
[and] 3
[(e) taxes on entertainment and amusements.]
(4) A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may
make regulations to provide for the levy and collection of any of the taxes
specified in sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of this paragraph 4
[and every such
regulation shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented
to by him, shall have no effect]. 5
9. Licences or leases for the purpose of prospecting for, or
extraction of, minerals.—(1) Such share of the royalties accruing each year
from licences or leases for the purpose of prospecting for, or the extraction of,
minerals granted by 6
[the Government of the State] in respect of any area
within an autonomous district as may be agreed upon between 6[the
Government of the State] and the District Council of such district shall be
made over to that District Council.
(2) If any dispute arises as to the share of such royalties to be made
over to a District Council, it shall be referred to the Governor for
determination and the amount determined by the Governor in his discretion
shall be deemed to be the amount payable under sub-paragraph (1) of this
paragraph to the District Council and the decision of the Governor shall be
final. ______________________________________________
1. The word "and" omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment)
Act, 2016, s. 16(i) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Ins. by s. 16(ii), ibid. (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Ins. by s. 16(iii), ibid. (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
4 Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
5. Paragraph 9 has been amended in its application to the States of Tripura and
Mizoram by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of
1988), s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-12-1988), so as to insert the following sub-paragraph after
sub-paragraph (2), namely:—
“(3) The Governor may, by order, direct that the share of royalties to be made
over to a District Council under this paragraph shall be made over to that Council
within a period of one year from the date of any agreement under sub-paragraph (1)
or, as the case may be, of any determination under sub-paragraph (2).”.
6. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for "the Government of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
294
1
10. Power of District Council to make regulations for the control
of money-lending and trading by non-tribals.—(1) The District
Council of an autonomous district may make regulations for the
regulation and control of money-lending or trading within the district by
persons other than Scheduled Tribes resident in the district.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may—(a) prescribe that no one except the holder of a licence issued
in that behalf shall carry on the business of money-lending;
(b) prescribe the maximum rate of interest which may be
charged or be recovered by a money-lender;
(c) provide for the maintenance of accounts by money-lenders
and for the inspection of such accounts by officers appointed in that
behalf by the District Council;
(d) prescribe that no person who is not a member of the
Scheduled Tribes resident in the district shall carry on wholesale or
retail business in any commodity except under a licence issued in that
behalf by the District Council: ______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 10 has been amended in its application to the States of Tripura and
Mizoram by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of
1988) (w.e.f. 16-12-1988) s.2, as under—(a) in the heading, the words “by non-tribals” shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-paragraph (1), the words “other than Scheduled Tribes” shall be
omitted;
(c) in sub-paragraph (2), for clause (d), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(d) prescribe that no person resident in the district shall carry on any
trade, whether wholesale or retail, except under a licence issued in that behalf
by the District Council:”.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
295
Provided that no regulations may be made under this paragraph
unless they are passed by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the
total membership of the District Council:
Provided further that it shall not be competent under any such
regulations to refuse the grant of a licence to a money-lender or a trader who
has been carrying on business within the district since before the time of the
making of such regulations.
(3) All regulations made under this paragraph shall be submitted
forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no
effect.
 * * *
11. Publication of laws, rules and regulations made under the
Schedule.—All laws, rules and regulations made under this Schedule by a
District Council or a Regional Council shall be published forthwith in the
Official Gazette of the State and shall on such publication have the force of
law. - 12. 1
[Application of Acts of Parliament and of the
Legislature of the State of Assam to autonomous districts and
autonomous regions in the State of Assam].— (1) Notwithstanding
anything in this Constitution,—
______________________________________________ Paragraph 10 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-2003), so as to insert
the following sub-paragraph after sub-paragraph (3), namely:—"(4) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial Council
constituted under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this Schedule.".
Paragraph 12 has been amended to its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-9-1995) as under,—‘in paragraph 12, in sub-paragraph (1), for the words and figure “matters specified in
paragraph 3 of this Schedule”, the words, figures and letter “matters specified in paragraph 3
or paragraph 3A of this Schedule” shall be substituted.’.
Paragraph 12 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-2003), as
under,—
‘in paragraph 12, in sub-paragraph (1), in clause (a), for the words, figures and letter
“matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A of this Schedule”, the words, figures and
letters “matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A or paragraph 3B of this Schedule”
shall be substituted.’.
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and Eighth
Sch., for the heading (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
296
 (a) no Act of the 1
[Legislature of the State of Assam] in respect
of any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule as
matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council
may make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the State of Assam
prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any non-distilled alcoholic
liquor shall apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region 2
[in
that State] unless in either case the District Council for such district or
having jurisdiction over such region by public notification so directs,
and the District Council in giving such direction with respect to any
Act may direct that the Act shall in its application to such district or
region or any part thereof have effect subject to such exceptions or
modifications as it thinks fit;
(b) the Governor may, by public notification, direct that any
Act of Parliament or of the 1
[Legislature of the State of Assam] to
which the provisions of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply
shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region 2
[in that State], or shall apply to such district or region or any part
thereof subject to such exceptions or modifications as he may specify
in the notification.
(2) Any direction given under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph
may be given so as to have retrospective effect. 3
[12A. Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of
the State of Meghalaya to autonomous districts and autonomous
regions in the State of Meghalaya.—Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution,—
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for "Legislature of the State" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Ins. by s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3. Subs. by s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch., ibid., for paragraph 12A (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
297
(a) if any provision of a law made by a District or Regional
Council in the State of Meghalaya with respect to any matter
specified in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3 of this Schedule or if
any provision of any regulation made by a District Council or a
Regional Council in that State under paragraph 8 or paragraph 10 of
this Schedule, is repugnant to any provision of a law made by the
Legislature of the State of Meghalaya with respect to that matter,
then, the law or regulation made by the District Council or, as the
case may be, the Regional Council whether made before or after the
law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya, shall, to the
extent of repugnancy, be void and the law made by the Legislature of
the State of Meghalaya shall prevail;
(b) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament,
by notification, direct that it shall not apply to an autonomous district
or an autonomous region in the State of Meghalaya, or shall apply to
such district or region or any part thereof subject to such exceptions
or modifications as he may specify in the notification and any such
direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect.] 1
[12AA. Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature
of the State of Tripura to the autonomous districts and autonomous
regions in the State of Tripura.—Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution,—
(a) no Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura in respect of
any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule as matters
with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council may
make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura
prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any non-distilled alcoholic
liquor shall apply to the autonomous district or an autonomous region
in that State unless, in either case, the District Council for that district
or having jurisdiction over such region by public notification so directs,
and the District Council in giving such direction with respect to any Act
may direct that the Act shall, in its application to that district or such
region or any part thereof have effect subject to such exceptions or
modifications as it thinks fit; ______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 12AA ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4
(w.e.f. 1-4-1985) and subsequently subs. by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution
(Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of 1988), s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-12-1988).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
298
(b) the Governor may, by public notification, direct that any
Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura to which the provisions
of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply, shall not apply to the
autonomous district or an autonomous region in that State, or shall
apply to that district or such region, or any part thereof, subject to
such exceptions or modifications, as he may specify in the
notification;
(c) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament,
by notification, direct that it shall not apply to the autonomous district
or an autonomous region in the State of Tripura, or shall apply to
such district or region or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions
or modifications as he may specify in the notification and any such
direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect.
12B. Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of
the State of Mizoram to autonomous districts and autonomous regions
in the State of Mizoram.—Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution,—
(a) no Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram in respect
of any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule as
matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional
Council may make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the State of
Mizoram prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any
non-distilled alcoholic liquor shall apply to any autonomous district
or autonomous region in that State unless, in either case, the District
Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region, by
public notification, so directs, and the District Council, in giving such
direction with respect to any Act, may direct that the Act shall, in its
application to such district or region or any part thereof, have effect
subject to such exceptions or modifications as it thinks fit;
(b) the Governor may, by public notification, direct that any
Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram to which the
provisions of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply, shall not
apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in that
State, or shall apply to such district or region, or any part thereof,
subject to such exceptions or modifications, as he may specify in the
notification;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
299
(c) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament,
by notification, direct that it shall not apply to an autonomous district
or an autonomous region in the State of Mizoram, or shall apply to
such district or region or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions
or modifications as he may specify in the notification and any such
direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect.]]
13. Estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to autonomous
districts to be shown separately in the annual financial statement.—The
estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to an autonomous district
which are to be credited to, or is to be made from, the Consolidated Fund of
the State 1
*** shall be first placed before the District Council for discussion
and then after such discussion be shown separately in the annual financial
statement of the State to be laid before the Legislature of the State under
article 202. 2
14. Appointment of Commission to inquire into and report on
the administration of autonomous districts and autonomous regions.—(1) The Governor may at any time appoint a Commission to examine and
report on any matter specified by him relating to the administration of the
autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State, including matters
specified in clauses (c), (d), (e) and (f) of sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1
of this Schedule, or may appoint a Commission to inquire into and report
from time to time on the administration of autonomous districts and
autonomous regions in the State generally and in particular on—(a) the provision of educational and medical facilities and
communications in such districts and regions;
(b) the need for any new or special legislation in respect of
such districts and regions; and
(c) the administration of the laws, rules and regulations made
by the District and Regional Councils;
and define the procedure to be followed by such Commission. ______________________________________________
1. The words "of Assam" omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation)
Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch. (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Paragraph 14 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2
(w.e.f. 12-9-1995) as under:—
‘in paragraph 14, in sub-paragraph (2), the words “with the recommendations
of the Governor with respect thereto” shall be omitted.’. 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
300
(2) The report of every such Commission with the recommendations
of the Governor with respect thereto shall be laid before the Legislature of
the State by the Minister concerned together with an explanatory
memorandum regarding the action proposed to be taken thereon by 1
[the
Government of the State.]
(3) In allocating the business of the Government of the State among
his Ministers the Governor may place one of his Ministers specially in
charge of the welfare of the autonomous districts and autonomous regions in
the State. 2
15. Annulment or suspension of acts and resolutions of District
and Regional Councils.—(1) If at any time the Governor is satisfied that an
act or resolution of a District or a Regional Council is likely to endanger the
safety of India 3
[or is likely to be prejudicial to public order], he may annul
or suspend such act or resolution and take such steps as he may consider
necessary (including the suspension of the Council and the assumption to
himself of all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Council)
to prevent the commission or continuance of such act, or the giving of effect
to such resolution.
(2) Any order made by the Governor under sub-paragraph (1) of this
paragraph together with the reasons therefor shall be laid before the
Legislature of the State as soon as possible and the order shall, unless
revoked by the Legislature of the State, continue in force for a period of
twelve months from the date on which it was so made:
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the
continuance in force of such order is passed by the Legislature of the State,
the order shall unless cancelled by the Governor continue in force for a
further period of twelve months from the date on which under this
paragraph it would otherwise have ceased to operate. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for "the Government of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Paragraph 15 has been amended in its application to the States of Tripura and
Mizoram by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988
(67 of 1988), s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-12-1988), as under,—In Paragraph 15, in sub-paragraph (2), —‘(a) in the opening paragraph, for the words “by the Legislature of the
State”, the words “by him” shall be substituted;
(b) the proviso shall be omitted.’.
3. Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
301
1
16. Dissolution of a District or a Regional Council.— 2
[(1)] The
Governor may on the recommendation of a Commission appointed under
paragraph 14 of this Schedule by public notification order the dissolution of
a District or a Regional Council, and—
(a) direct that a fresh general election shall be held
immediately for the reconstitution of the Council; or
(b) subject to the previous approval of the Legislature of the
State assume the administration of the area under the authority of
such Council himself or place the administration of such area under
the Commission appointed under the said paragraph or any other
body considered suitable by him for a period not exceeding twelve
months:
Provided that when an order under clause (a) of this paragraph has
been made, the Governor may take the action referred to in clause (b) of this
paragraph with regard to the administration of the area in question pending
the reconstitution of the Council on fresh general election:
Provided further that no action shall be taken under clause (b) of this
paragraph without giving the District or the Regional Council, as the case
may be, an opportunity of placing its views before the Legislature of the
State. ______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 16 has been amended in its application to the States of Tripura and
Mizoram by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988
(67 of 1988) s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-12-1988), as under,—‘(a) in sub-paragraph (1), the words “subject to the previous approval of the
Legislature of the State” occurring in clause (b), and the second proviso shall be
omitted;
(b) for sub-paragraph (3), the following sub-paragraph shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(3) Every order made under sub-paragraph (1) or sub-paragraph (2) of
this paragraph, along with the reasons therefor shall be laid before the
Legislature of the State.”.’.
2. Paragraph 16 renumbered as sub-paragraph (1) thereof by the Assam
Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and Fourth Sch.
(w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
302
1
[(2) If at any time the Governor is satisfied that a situation has arisen in
which the administration of an autonomous district or region cannot be carried
on in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule, he may, by public
notification, assume to himself all or any of the functions or powers vested in or
exercisable by the District Council or, as the case may be, the Regional Council
and declare that such functions or powers shall be exercisable by such person or
authority as he may specify in this behalf, for a period not exceeding six months:
Provided that the Governor may by a further order or orders extend the
operation of the initial order by a period not exceeding six months on each
occasion.
(3) Every order made under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph with
the reasons therefor shall be laid before the Legislature of the State and shall
cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the
State Legislature first sits after the issue of the order, unless, before the
expiry of that period it has been approved by that State Legislature.] 2
17. Exclusion of areas from autonomous districts in forming
constituencies in such districts.—For the purposes of elections to 3
[the
Legislative Assembly of Assam or Meghalaya] 4
[or Tripura] 5
[or Mizoram],
the Governor may by order declare that any area within an autonomous
district 6
[in the State of Assam or Meghalaya 4
[or Tripura] 5
[or Mizoram],
as the case may be,] shall not form part of any constituency to fill a seat or
seats in the Assembly reserved for any such district but shall form part of a
constituency to fill a seat or seats in the Assembly not so reserved to be
specified in the order. 7
[18.* * * * *] ______________________________________________
1. Added by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74
and Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).
2. Paragraph 17 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2
(w.e.f. 7-9-2003) so as to insert the following proviso, namely:—“Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial
Areas District.”.
3. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for "the Legislative Assembly of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
5. Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
6. Ins. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for "the Legislative Assembly of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
7. Paragraph 18 omitted by s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
303
1
19. Transitional provisions.—(1) As soon as possible after the
commencement of this Constitution the Governor shall take steps for the
constitution of a District Council for each autonomous district in the State
under this Schedule and, until a District Council is so constituted for an
autonomous district, the administration of such district shall be vested in the
Governor and the following provisions shall apply to the administration of
the areas within such district instead of the foregoing provisions of this
Schedule, namely:—
(a) no Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall
apply to any such area unless the Governor by public notification so
directs; and the Governor in giving such a direction with respect to
any Act may direct that the Act shall, in its application to the area or
to any specified part thereof, have effect subject to such exceptions or
modifications as he thinks fit;
(b) the Governor may make regulations for the peace and good
government of any such area and any regulations so made may repeal
or amend any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State or
any existing law which is for the time being applicable to such area.
(2) Any direction given by the Governor under clause (a) of
sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph may be given so as to have retrospective
effect. ______________________________________________ 1. Paragraph 19 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the
Sixth Sch. to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2
(w.e.f. 7-9-2003), so as to insert the following sub-paragraph after sub-paragraph
(3), namely :—
‘(4) As soon as possible after the commencement of this Act and InterimExecutive Council for Bodoland Territorial Areas District in Assam shall be
formed by the Governor from amongst leaders of the Bodo movement, including
the signatories to the Memorandum of Settlement, and shall provide adequate
representation to the non-tribal communities in that area:
Provided that Interim Council shall be for a period of six months during
which endeavour to hold the election to the Council shall be made.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph, the expression
“Memorandum of Settlement” means the Memorandum signed on the 10th day of
February, 2003 between Government of India, Government of Assam and Bodo
Liberation Tigers.’.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
304
(3) All regulations made under clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) of this
paragraph shall be submitted forthwith to the President and, until assented
to by him, shall have no effect. 1
[20. Tribal areas.—(1) The areas specified in Parts I, II 2
[, IIA] and
III of the table below shall respectively be the tribal areas within the State of
Assam, the State of Meghalaya 2
[, the State of Tripura] and the 3
[State] of
Mizoram.
(2) 4
[Any reference in Part I, Part II or Part III of the table below] to
any district shall be construed as a reference to the territories comprised
within the autonomous district of that name existing immediately before the
day appointed under clause (b) of section 2 of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971:
Provided that for the purposes of clauses (e) and (f) of sub-paragraph
(1) of paragraph 3, paragraph 4, paragraph 5, paragraph 6, sub-paragraph
(2), clauses (a), (b) and (d) of sub-paragraph (3) and sub-paragraph (4) of
paragraph 8 and clause (d) of sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 10 of this
Schedule, no part of the area comprised within the municipality of Shillong
shall be deemed to be within the 5
[Khasi Hills District]. 2
[(3) The reference in Part IIA in the table below to the "Tripura
Tribal Areas District" shall be construed as a reference to the territory
comprising the tribal areas specified in the First Schedule to the Tripura
Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council Act, 1979.] ______________________________________________ 1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for paragraphs 20 and 20A (w.e.f. 21-1-1972) and paragraph 20A
further substituted by the Government of Union Territory (Amendment) Act, 1971
(83 of 1971) s. 13 (w.e.f. 29-4-1972).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
3. Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for "Union territory"
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4, for "any
reference in the table below" (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
5. Subs. by the Government of Meghalaya Notification No. DCA 31/72/11, dated the
14th June, 1973, Gazette of Meghalaya, Pt. VA, dated 23-6-1973, p. 200. 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
305
TABLE
PART I
1. The North Cachar Hills District.
2. 1
[The Karbi Anglong District.] 2
[3.The Bodoland Territorial Areas District.]
PART II 3
[1. Khasi Hills District.
2. Jaintia Hills District.]
3. The Garo Hills District. 4
[PART IIA]
 Tripura Tribal Areas District]
Part III 5
* * *
6
[1. The Chakma District. 7
[2. The Mara District. 3. The Lai District.]] 8
[20A. Dissolution of the Mizo District Council.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Schedule, the District Council of the Mizo District existing immediately before the prescribed date (hereinafter referred to as the Mizo District Council) shall stand dissolved and cease to exist. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Government of Assam Notification No. TAD/R/115/74/47,
dated 14-10-1976 for "The Mikir Hills District".
2. Ins. by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003
(44 of 2003), s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-2003).
3. Subs. by the Government of Meghalaya Notification No. DCA 31/72/11,
dated the 14th June, 1973, Gazette of Meghalaya, Pt. VA, dated 23-6-1973, p. 200.
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
5. The words "The Mizo District." omitted by the Government of Union Territories
(Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of 1971), s. 13 (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).
6. Ins. by the Mizoram District Councils (Miscellaneous Provisions) Order, 1972,
published in the Mizoram Gazette, 1972, dated the 5th May, 1972, Vol. I, Pt. II,
p.17 (w.e.f. 29-4-1972).
7. Subs. by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988
(67 of 1988), s. 2, for serial numbers 2 and 3 and the entries relating thereto
(w.e.f. 16-12-1988).
8. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Recognisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and
Eight Sch. for paragraph 20 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972) and further subs. by the Government
of Union Territory (Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of 1971), s. 13 for paragraph 20A
(w.e.f. 16-2-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
306
(2) The Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram may, by one or more orders, provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—(a) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and liabilities of the Mizo District Council (including the rights and liabilities under any contract made by it) to the Union or to any other authority; (b) the substitution of the Union or any other authority for the Mizo District Council, or the addition of the Union or any other authority, as a party to any legal proceedings to which the Mizo District Council is a party; (c) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the Mizo District Council to or by the Union or any other authority, the terms and conditions of service applicable to such employees after such transfer or re-employment; (d) the continuance of any laws, made by the Mizo District Council and in force immediately before its dissolution, subject to such adaptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as the Administrator may make in this behalf, until such
laws are altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority; (e) such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters as the Administrator considers necessary. Explanation.—In this paragraph and in paragraph 20B of this Schedule, the expression "prescribed date" means the date on which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram is duly constituted under and in accordance with the provisions of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963. (20 of 1963)] 1
[20B. Autonomous regions in the Union territory of Mizoram to be autonomous districts and transitory provisions consequent thereto.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Schedule,— (a) every autonomous region existing immediately before the prescribed date in the Union territory of Mizoram shall, on and fromthat date, be an autonomous district in that Union territory (hereafter
referred to as the corresponding new district) and the Administrator
thereof may, by one or more orders, direct that such consequential amendments as are necessary to give effect to the provisions of this clause shall be made in paragraph 20 of this Schedule (including Part III of the table appended to that paragraph) and thereupon the said
paragraph and the said Part III shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly; ___________________________________________________________ 1. Sub. by the Government of Union Territory (Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of
1971), s. 13 for paragraph 20A (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
307
(b) every Regional Council of an autonomous region in the
Union territory of Mizoram existing immediately before the
prescribed date (hereafter referred to as the existing Regional
Council) shall, on and from that date and until a District Council is
duly constituted for the corresponding new district, be deemed to be
the District Council of that district (hereafter referred to as the
corresponding new District Council).
(2) Every member whether elected or nominated of an existing Regional
Council shall be deemed to have been elected or, as the case may be, nominated
to the corresponding new District Council and shall hold office until a District
Council is duly constituted for the corresponding new district under this
Schedule.
(3) Until rules are made under sub-paragraph (7) of paragraph 2 and
sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 4 of this Schedule by the corresponding new
District Council, the rules made under the said provisions by the existing
Regional Council and in force immediately before the prescribed date shall
have effect in relation to the corresponding new District Council subject to
such adaptations and modifications as may be made therein by the
Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram.
(4) The Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram may, by
one or more orders, provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the transfer in whole or in part of the assets, rights and
liabilities of the existing Regional Council (including the rights and
liabilities under any contract made by it) to the corresponding new
District Council;
(b) the substitution of the corresponding new District Council
for the existing Regional Council as a party to the legal proceedings
to which the existing Regional Council is a party;
(c) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the
existing Regional Council to or by the corresponding new District
Council, the terms and conditions of service applicable to such
employees after such transfer or re-employment;
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
308
(d) the continuance of any laws made by the existing Regional
Council and in force immediately before the prescribed date, subject
to such adaptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal or
amendment, as the Administrator may make in this behalf until such
laws are altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or
other competent authority;
(e) such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters
as the Administrator considers necessary.] 1
[20BA. Exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the
discharge of his functions.—The Governor in the discharge of his
functions under sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs
(1), (6), sub-paragraph (6A) excluding the first proviso and sub-paragraph
(7) of paragraph 2, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (4) of
paragraph 4, paragraph 5, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, sub-paragraph
(2) of paragraph 7, sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 8, sub-paragraph (3) of
paragraph 9, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 10, sub-paragraph (1) of
paragraph 14, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 15 and sub-paragraphs (1) and
(2) of paragraph 16 of this Schedule, shall, after consulting the Council of
Ministers and the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi
Anglong Autonomous Council, as the case may be, take such action as he
considers necessary in his discretion.] 2
[20BB. Exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the
discharge of his functions.—The Governor, in the discharge of his
functions under sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs
(1) and (7) of paragraph 2, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3, sub-paragraph
(4) of paragraph 4, paragraph 5, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, subparagraph (2) of paragraph 7, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 9, subparagraph (1) of paragraph 14, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 15 and subparagraphs (1) and (2) of paragraph 16 of this Schedule, shall, after
consulting the Council of Ministers, and if he thinks it necessary, the
District Council or the Regional Council concerned, take such action as he
considers necessary in his discretion.] ______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 20BA has been inserted in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-9-1995).
2. Paragraph 20BB has been inserted in its application to the States of Tripura and Mizoram, by
the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of 1988), s. 2
(w.e.f. 16-12-1988).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
309
1
[20C. Interpretation.—Subject to any provision made in this
behalf, the provisions of this Schedule shall, in their application to the
Union territory of Mizoram, have effect—(1) as if references to the Governor and Government of the
State were references to the Administrator of the Union territory
appointed under article 239, references to State (except in the
expression "Government of the State") were references to the Union
territory of Mizoram and references to the State Legislature were
references to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of
Mizoram;
(2) as if—
(a) in sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 4, the provision
for consultation with the Government of the State concerned
had been omitted;
(b) in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 6, for the words
"to which the executive power of the State extends", the words
"with respect to which the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory of Mizoram has power to make laws" had been
substituted;
(c) in paragraph 13, the words and figures "under article
202" had been omitted.]
21. Amendment of the Schedule.—(1) Parliament may from time to
time by law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the
provisions of this Schedule and, when the Schedule is so amended, any
reference to this Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a
reference to such Schedule as so amended.
(2) No such law as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this
paragraph shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the
purposes of article 368. ___________________________________________________________
1. Sub. by the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of
1971), s. 13 for paragraph 20A (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).
310
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
(Article 246)
List I—Union List
1. Defence of India and every part thereof including preparation for
defence and all such acts as may be conducive in times of war to its prosecution
and after its termination to effective demobilisation.
2. Naval, military and air forces; any other armed forces of the Union. 1
[2A. Deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force
subject to the control of the Union or any contingent or unit thereof in any State
in aid of the civil power; powers, jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the
members of such forces while on such deployment.]
3. Delimitation of cantonment areas, local self-government in such areas,
the constitution and powers within such areas of cantonment authorities and the
regulation of house accommodation (including the control of rents) in such areas.4. Naval, military and air force works.
5. Arms, firearms, ammunition and explosives.
6. Atomic energy and mineral resources necessary for its production.
7. Industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary for the
purpose of defence or for the prosecution of war.
8. Central Bureau of Intelligence and Investigation.
9. Preventive detention for reasons connected with Defence, Foreign
Affairs, or the security of India; persons subjected to such detention.
10. Foreign affairs; all matters which bring the Union into relation with
any foreign country.
11. Diplomatic, consular and trade representation.
12. United Nations Organisation.
13. Participation in international conferences, associations and other
bodies and implementing of decisions made thereat.
14. Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries and
implementing of treaties, agreements and conventions with foreign countries. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
311
15. War and peace.
16. Foreign jurisdiction.
17. Citizenship, naturalisation and aliens.
18. Extradition.
19. Admission into, and emigration and expulsion from, India; passports
and visas.
20. Pilgrimages to places outside India.
21. Piracies and crimes committed on the high seas or in the air; offences
against the law of nations committed on land or the high seas or in the air.
22. Railways.
23. Highways declared by or under law made by Parliament to be national
highways.
24. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways, declared by Parliament
by law to be national waterways, as regards mechanically propelled vessels; the
rule of the road on such waterways.
25. Maritime shipping and navigation, including shipping and navigation
on tidal waters; provision of education and training for the mercantile marine
and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other
agencies.
26. Lighthouses, including lightships, beacons and other provision for the
safety of shipping and aircraft.
27. Ports declared by or under law made by Parliament or existing law to
be major ports, including their delimitation, and the constitution and powers of
port authorities therein.
28. Port quarantine, including hospitals connected therewith; seamen's and
marine hospitals.
29. Airways; aircraft and air navigation; provision of aerodromes;
regulation and organisation of air traffic and of aerodromes; provision for
aeronautical education and training and regulation of such education and
training provided by States and other agencies.
30. Carriage of passengers and goods by railway, sea or air, or by national
waterways in mechanically propelled vessels.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
312
31. Posts and telegraphs; telephones, wireless, broadcasting and other like
forms of communication.
32. Property of the Union and the revenue therefrom, but as regards
property situated in a State 1
*** subject to legislation by the State, save in so
far as Parliament by law otherwise provides. 2
[33* * * * *]
34. Courts of wards for the estates of Rulers of Indian States.
35. Public debt of the Union.
36. Currency, coinage and legal tender; foreign exchange.
37. Foreign loans.
38. Reserve Bank of India.
39. Post Office Savings Bank.
40. Lotteries organised by the Government of India or the Government of
a State.
41. Trade and commerce with foreign countries; import and export across
customs frontiers; definition of customs frontiers.
42. Inter-State trade and commerce.
43. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of trading corporations,
including banking, insurance and financial corporations, but not including
co-operative societies.
44. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, whether
trading or not, with objects not confined to one State, but not including
universities.
45. Banking.
46. Bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes and other like
instruments.
47. Insurance.
48. Stock exchanges and futures markets.
49. Patents, inventions and designs; copyright; trade-marks and merchandise
marks. ______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Entry 33 omitted by s. 26, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
313
50. Establishment of standards of weight and measure.
51. Establishment of standards of quality for goods to be exported out of
India or transported from one State to another.
52. Industries, the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament
by law to be expedient in the public interest.
53. Regulation and development of oilfields and mineral oil resources;
petroleum and petroleum products; other liquids and substances declared by
Parliament by law to be dangerously inflammable.
54. Regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which
such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
55. Regulation of labour and safety in mines and oilfields.
56. Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to
the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of the
Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
57. Fishing and fisheries beyond territorial waters.
58. Manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by Union agencies;
regulation and control of manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by other
agencies.
59. Cultivation, manufacture, and sale for export, of opium.
60. Sanctioning of cinematograph films for exhibition.
61. Industrial disputes concerning Union employees.
62. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as
the National Library, the Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the
Victoria Memorial and the Indian War Memorial, and any other like institution
financed by the Government of India wholly or in part and declared by
Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance.
63. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the
Benares Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the 1
[Delhi
University; the University established in pursuance of article 371E;] any other
institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 4, for "Delhi
University and" (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
314
64. Institutions for scientific or technical education financed by the
Government of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to be
institutions of national importance.
65. Union agencies and institutions for—(a) professional, vocational or technical training, including the
training of police officers; or
(b) the promotion of special studies or research; or
(c) scientific or technical assistance in the investigation or detection
of crime.
66. Co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher
education or research and scientific and technical institutions.
67. Ancient and historical monuments and records, and archaeological
sites and remains, 1
[declared by or under law made by Parliament] to be of
national importance.
68. The Survey of India, the Geological, Botanical, Zoological and
Anthropological Surveys of India; Meteorological organisations.
69. Census.
70. Union Public Service; All-India Services; Union Public Service
Commission.
71. Union pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the Government of
India or out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
72. Elections to Parliament, to the Legislatures of States and to the offices
of President and Vice-President; the Election Commission.
73. Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and
Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker
of the House of the People.
74. Powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament and of
the members and the Committees of each House; enforcement of attendance of
persons for giving evidence or producing documents before committees of
Parliament or commissions appointed by Parliament.
75. Emoluments, allowances, privileges, and rights in respect of leave
of absence, of the President and Governors; salaries and allowances of
the Ministers for the Union; the salaries, allowances, and rights in respect of
leave of absence and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for "declared by
Parliament by law" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
315
76. Audit of the accounts of the Union and of the States.
77. Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme
Court (including contempt of such Court), and the fees taken therein; persons
entitled to practise before the Supreme Court.
78. Constitution and organisation 1
[(including vacations)] of the High
Courts except provisions as to officers and servants of High Courts; persons
entitled to practise before the High Courts. 2
[79. Extension of the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and exclusion of the
jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.]
80. Extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force
belonging to any State to any area outside that State, but not so as to enable the
police of one State to exercise powers and jurisdiction in any area outside that
State without the consent of the Government of the State in which such area is
situated; extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force
belonging to any State to railway areas outside that State.
81. Inter-State migration; inter-State quarantine.
82. Taxes on income other than agricultural income.
83. Duties of customs including export duties. 3
[84. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced in
India, namely:—
(a) petroleum crude;
(b) high speed diesel;
(c) motor spirit (commonly known as petrol);
(d) natural gas;
(e) aviation turbine fuel; and
(f) tobacco and tobacco products.]
85. Corporation tax. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 12 (with retrospective
effect).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. for entry 79
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(a)(i)
for entry 84 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
316
86. Taxes on the capital value of the assets, exclusive of agricultural land,
of individuals and companies; taxes on the capital of companies.
87. Estate duty in respect of property other than agricultural land.
88. Duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land.
89. Terminal taxes on goods or passengers, carried by railway, sea or air;
taxes on railway fares and freights.
90. Taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and
futures markets.
91. Rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques,
promissory notes, bills of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer
of shares, debentures, proxies and receipts. 1
[92. * * * * * *] 2
[92A. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers,
where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce.] 3
[92B. Taxes on the consignments of goods (whether the consignment is to
the person making it or to any other person), where such consignment takes
place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.] 4
[92C. * * * * * *]
93. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List.
94. Inquires, surveys and statistics for the purpose of any of the matters in
this List.
95. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with
respect to any of the matters in this List; admiralty jurisdiction.
96. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees
taken in any court.
97. Any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III including any tax
not mentioned in either of those Lists. ______________________________________________
1. Entry 92 omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016,
s. 17(a)(ii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-9-1956).
3. Ins.by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2-2-1983).
4. Entry 92C was ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4
(which was not enforced) and omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First
Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(a)(ii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
317
List II—State List
1. Public order (but not including 1
[the use of any naval, military or air
force or any other armed force of the Union or of any other force subject to the
control of the Union or of any contingent or unit thereof] in aid of the civil
power). 2
[2. Police (including railway and village police) subject to the provisions
of entry 2A of List I.]
3. 3
*** Officers and servants of the High Court; procedure in rent and
revenue courts; fees taken in all courts except the Supreme Court.
4. Prisons, reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a
like nature, and persons detained therein; arrangements with other States for the
use of prisons and other institutions.
5. Local government, that is to say, the constitution and powers of
municipal corporations, improvement trusts, districts boards, mining settlement
authorities and other local authorities for the purpose of local self-government
or village administration.
6. Public health and sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries.
7. Pilgrimages, other than pilgrimages to places outside India.
8. Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, manufacture,
possession, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors.
9. Relief of the disabled and unemployable.
10. Burials and burial grounds; cremations and cremation grounds. 4
[11* * * * *]
12. Libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or
financed by the State; ancient and historical monuments and records other than
those 5
[declared by or under law made by Parliament] to be of national
importance. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57, for certain
words (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 57, for entry 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Certain words omitted by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
4. Entry 11 omitted by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for "declared by
Parliament by law" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
318
13. Communications, that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries, and other
means of communication not specified in List I; municipal tramways;
ropeways; inland waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List
I and List III with regard to such waterways; vehicles other than mechanically
propelled vehicles.
14. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection
against pests and prevention of plant diseases.
15. Preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of
animal diseases; veterinary training and practice.
16. Pounds and the prevention of cattle trespass.
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage
and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of
entry 56 of List I.
18. Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including the
relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and
alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans;
colonization. 1
[19* * * * *
20* * * * *]
21. Fisheries.
22. Courts of wards subject to the provisions of entry 34 of List I;
encumbered and attached estates.
23. Regulation of mines and mineral development subject to the
provisions of List I with respect to regulation and development under the
control of the Union.
24. Industries subject to the provisions of 2
[entries 7 and 52] of List I.
25. Gas and gas-works.
26. Trade and commerce within the State subject to the provisions of entry
33 of List III. ______________________________________________
1. Entries 19 and 20 omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976,
s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 28 for entry 52
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
319
27. Production, supply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions
of entry 33 of List III.
28. Markets and fairs. 1
[29* * * * *]
30. Money-lending and money-lenders; relief of agricultural indebtedness.
31. Inns and inn-keepers.
32. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other than
those specified in List I, and universities; unincorporated trading, literary,
scientific, religious and other societies and associations; co-operative societies.
33. Theatres and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the provisions
of entry 60 of List I; sports, entertainments and amusements.
34. Betting and gambling.
35. Works, lands and buildings vested in or in the possession of the State. 2
[36* * * * *]
37. Elections to the Legislature of the State subject to the provisions of
any law made by Parliament.
38. Salaries and allowances of members of the Legislature of the State, of
the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, if there is a
Legislative Council, of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof.
39. Powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and of
the members and the committees thereof, and, if there is a Legislative Council,
of that Council and of the members and the committees thereof; enforcement of
attendance of persons for giving evidence or producing documents before
committees of the Legislature of the State.
40. Salaries and allowances of Ministers for the State.
41. State public services; State Public Service Commission.
42. State pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the State or out of
the Consolidated Fund of the State.
43. Public debt of the State.
44. Treasure trove. ______________________________________________
1. Entry 29 omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Entry 36 omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 26
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
320
45. Land revenue, including the assessment and collection of revenue, the
maintenance of land records, survey for revenue purposes and records of rights,
and alienation of revenues.
46. Taxes on agricultural income.
47. Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land.
48. Estate duty in respect of agricultural land.
49. Taxes on lands and buildings.
50. Taxes on mineral rights subject to any limitations imposed by
Parliament by law relating to mineral development.
51. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced in
the State and countervailing duties at the same or lower rates on similar goods
manufactured or produced elsewhere in India:—(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption;
(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics,
but not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any
substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this entry. 1
[52. * * * * * *]
53. Taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity. 2
[54. Taxes on the sale of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit
(commonly known as petrol), natural gas, aviation turbine fuel and alcoholic
liquor for human consumption, but not including sale in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce or sale in the course of international trade or
commerce of such goods.] 3
[55. * * * * * *]
56. Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland
waterways. ______________________________________________
1. Entry 52 omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016,
s. 17(b)(i) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-9-1956) and
further subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016,
s. 17(b)(ii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Entry 55 omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016,
s. 17(b)(iii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
321
57. Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for
use on roads, including tramcars subject to the provisions of entry 35 of List III.
58. Taxes on animals and boats.
59. Tolls.
60. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.
61. Capitation taxes. 1
[62. Taxes on entertainments and amusements to the extent levied and
collected by a Panchayat or a Municipality or a Regional Council or a District
Council.]
63. Rates of stamp duty in respect of documents other than those specified
in the provisions of List I with regard to rates of stamp duty.
64. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List.
65. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with
respect to any of the matters in this List.
66. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees
taken in any court.
List III—Concurrent List
1. Criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code
at the commencement of this Constitution but excluding offences against laws
with respect to any of the matters specified in List I or List II and excluding the
use of naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid
of the civil power.
2. Criminal procedure, including all matters included in the Code of
Criminal Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution.
3. Preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a State,
the maintenance of public order, or the maintenance of supplies and services
essential to the community; persons subjected to such detention.
4. Removal from one State to another State of prisoners, accused persons
and persons subjected to preventive detention for reasons specified in entry 3 of
this List. ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(b)(iv),
for entry 62 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
322
5. Marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy
and succession; joint family and partition; all matters in respect of which
parties in judicial proceedings were immediately before the commencement of
this Constitution subject to their personal law.
 6. Transfer of property other than agricultural land; registration of deeds
and documents.
7. Contracts, including partnership, agency, contracts of carriage, and
other special forms of contracts, but not including contracts relating to
agricultural land.
 8. Actionable wrongs.
 9. Bankruptcy and insolvency.
10. Trust and Trustees.
11. Administrators-general and official trustees. 1
[11A. Administration of Justice; constitution and organisation of all
courts, except the Supreme Court and the High Courts.]
12. Evidence and oaths; recognition of laws, public acts and records, and
judicial proceedings.
13. Civil procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Civil
Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution, limitation and arbitration.
14. Contempt of court, but not including contempt of the Supreme Court.
15. Vagrancy; nomadic and migratory tribes.
16. Lunacy and mental deficiency, including places for the reception or
treatment of lunatics and mental deficients.
17. Prevention of cruelty to animals. 1
[17A. Forests.
17B. Protection of wild animals and birds.]
18. Adulteration of foodstuffs and other goods.
19. Drugs and poisons, subject to the provisions of entry 59 of List I with
respect to opium.
20. Economic and social planning. 1
[20A. Population control and family planning.] ______________________________________________
1. Entries 11A, 17A, 17B and 20A ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
323
21. Commercial and industrial monopolies, combines and trusts.
22. Trade unions; industrial and labour disputes.
23. Social security and social insurance; employment and unemployment.
24. Welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds,
employers' liability, workmen's compensation, invalidity and old age pensions
and maternity benefits. 1
[25. Education, including technical education, medical education and
universities, subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I;
vocational and technical training of labour.]
26. Legal, medical and other professions.
27. Relief and rehabilitation of persons displaced from their original place
of residence by reason of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan.
28. Charities and charitable institutions, charitable and religious
endowments and religious institutions.
29. Prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or
contagious diseases or pests affecting men, animals or plants.
30. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.
31. Ports other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament or
existing law to be major ports.
32. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways as regards mechanically
propelled vessels, and the rule of the road on such waterways, and the carriage
of passengers and goods on inland waterways subject to the provisions of List I
with respect to national waterways. 2
[33. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution
of,—
(a) the products of any industry where the control of such industry
by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the
public interest, and imported goods of the same kind as such products;
(b) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils;
(c) cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concentrates;
(d) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seed; and
(e) raw jute.] ______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Third Amendment) Act, 1954, s. 2 for entry 33
(w.e.f. 22-2-1955).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Seventh Schedule)
324
1
[33A. Weights and measures except establishment of standards.]
34. Price control.
35. Mechanically propelled vehicles including the principles on which
taxes on such vehicles are to be levied.
36. Factories
37. Boilers.
38. Electricity.
39. Newspapers, books and printing presses.
40. Archaeological sites and remains other than those 2
[declared by or
under law made by Parliament] to be of national importance.
41. Custody, management and disposal of property (including agricultural
land) declared by law to be evacuee property. 3
[42. Acquisition and requisitioning of property.]
43. Recovery in a State of claims in respect of taxes and other public
demands, including arrears of land-revenue and sums recoverable as such
arrears, arising outside that State.
44. Stamp duties other than duties or fees collected by means of judicial
stamps, but not including rates of stamp duty.
45. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters specified
in List II or List III.
46. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with
respect to any of the matters in this List.
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees
taken in any court. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for "declared by
Parliament by law" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 26, ibid. for entry 42 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
325
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali. 1
[3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.] 2
[5.] Gujarati. 3
[6.] Hindi. 3
[7.] Kannada. 3
[8.] Kashmiri. 4
[3
[9.] Konkani.] 1
[10. Maithili.] 5
[11.] Malayalam. 4
[6
[12.] Manipuri.] 6
[13.] Marathi. 4
[6
[14.] Nepali.] 6
[15.] 7
[Odia]. 6
[16.] Punjabi. 6
[17.] Sanskrit. ______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
2. Entry 3 renumbered as entry 5 by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
3. Entries 4 to 7 renumbered as entries 6 to 9 by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-first Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31-8-1992).
5. Entry 8 renumbered as entry 11 by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment) Act,
2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
6. Entries 9 to 14 renumbered as entries 12 to 17 by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
7. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-sixth Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 2, for "Oriya"
(w.e.f. 23-9-2011). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Eighth Schedule)
326
1
[18. Santhali.] 2
[3
[19.] Sindhi.] 4
[20.] Tamil. 4
[21.] Telugu.
 4
[22.] Urdu.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
2. Added by the Constitution (Twenty-first Amendment) Act, 1967, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-4-1967).
3. Entry 15 renumbered as entry 19 by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment)
Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
4. Entries 16 to 18 renumbered as entries 20 to 22 by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
327
1
[NINTH SCHEDULE
(Article 31B)
1. The Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXX of 1950).
2. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948. (Bombay Act
LXVII of 1948).
3. The Bombay Maleki Tenure Abolition Act, 1949 (Bombay Act LXI of 1949).
4. The Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition Act, 1949. (Bombay Act LXII
of 1949).
5. The Panch Mahals Mehwassi Tenure Abolition Act, 1949. (Bombay Act
LXIII of 1949).
6. The Bombay Khoti Abolition Act, 1950 (Bombay Act VI of 1950).
7. The Bombay Paragana and Kulkarni Watan Abolition Act, 1950.
(Bombay Act LX of 1950).
8. The Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals,
Alienated Lands) Act, 1950 (Madhya Pradesh Act I of 1951).
9. The Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948
(Madras Act XXVI of 1948).
10. The Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari)
Amendment Act, 1950 (Madras Act I of 1950).
11. The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950
(Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1951).
12. The Hyderabad (Abolition of Jagirs) Regulation, 1358F (No. LXIX of
1358, Fasli).
13. The Hyderabad Jagirs (Commutation) Regulation, 1359F (No. XXV of
1359, Fasli).] 2
[14. The Bihar Displaced Persons Rehabilitation (Acquisition of Land)
Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXXVIII of 1950).
15. The United Provinces Land Acquisition (Rehabilitation of Refugees)
Act, 1948 (U.P. Act XXVI of 1948).
16. The Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land Acquisition) Act, 1948
(Act LX of 1948).
17. Sections 52A to 52G of the Insurance Act, 1938 (Act IV of 1938), as inserted
by section 42 of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950 (Act XLVII of 1950).
18. The Railway Companies (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1951 (Act LI of 1951). ______________________________________________
1. Ninth Schedule (entries 1 to 13) added by the Constitution (First Amendment)
Act, 1951, s. 14 (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
2. Ninth Schedule (entries 14 to 20) added by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment)
Act, 1955, s. 5 (w.e.f. 27-4-1955).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
328
19. Chapter III-A of the Industries (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1951 (Act LXV of 1951), as inserted by section 13 of the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 1953 (Act XXVI of 1953).
20. The West Bengal Land Development and Planning Act, 1948
(West Bengal Act XXI of 1948), as amended by West Bengal Act XXIX of
1951.] 1
[21. The Andhra Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1961
(Andhra Pradesh Act X of 1961).
22. The Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Tenancy and Agricultural Lands
(Validation) Act, 1961 (Andhra Pradesh Act XXI of 1961).
23. The Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Ijara and Kowli Land
Cancellation of Irregular Pattas and Abolition of Concessional Assessment
Act, 1961 (Andhra Pradesh Act XXXVI of 1961).
24. The Assam State Acquisition of Lands belonging to Religious or
Charitable Institution of Public Nature Act, 1959 (Assam Act IX of 1961).
25. The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1953 (Bihar Act XX of 1954).
26. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of
Surplus Land) Act, 1961 (Bihar Act XII of 1962), except section 28 of this Act.
27. The Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1954
(Bombay Act I of 1955).
28. The Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1957
(Bombay Act XVIII of 1958).
29. The Bombay Inams (Kutch Area) Abolition Act, 1958 (Bombay
Act XCVIII of 1958).
30. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Gujarat Amendment)
Act, 1960 (Gujarat Act XVI of 1960).
31. The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling Act, 1960 (Gujarat Act XXVI
of 1961).
32. The Sagbara and Mehwassi Estates (Proprietary Rights Abolition, etc.)
Regulation, 1962 (Gujarat Regulation I of 1962). ______________________________________________
1. Entries 21 to 64 and Explanation added by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment)
Act, 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20-6-1964). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
329
33. The Gujarat Surviving Alienations Abolition Act, 1963 (Gujarat Act
XXXIII of 1963), except in so far as this Act relates to an alienation referred to
in sub-clause (d) of clause (3) of section 2 thereof.
34. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) Act, 1961
(Maharashtra Act XXVII of 1961).
35. The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Re-enactment, Validation
and Further Amendment) Act, 1961 (Maharashtra Act XLV of 1961).
36. The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1950
(Hyderabad Act XXI of 1950).
37. The Jenmikaram Payment (Abolition) Act, 1960 (Kerala Act III of 1961).
38. The Kerala Land Tax Act, 1961 (Kerala Act XIII of 1961).
39. The Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 (Kerala Act I of 1964).
40. The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (Madhya Pradesh
Act XX of 1959).
41. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1960
(Madhya Pradesh Act XX of 1960).
42. The Madras Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955
(Madras Act XXV of 1955).
43. The Madras Cultivating Tenants (Payment of Fair Rent) Act, 1956
(Madras Act XXIV of 1956).
44. The Madras Occupants of Kudiyiruppu (Protection from Eviction)
Act, 1961 (Madras Act XXXVIII of 1961).
45. The Madras Public Trusts (Regulation of Administration of
Agricultural Lands) Act, 1961 (Madras Act LVII of 1961).
46. The Madras Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961
(Madras Act LVIII of 1961).
47. The Mysore Tenancy Act, 1952 (Mysore Act XIII of 1952).
48. The Coorg Tenants Act, 1957 (Mysore Act XIV of 1957).
49. The Mysore Village Offices Abolition Act, 1961 (Mysore Act XIV of 1961).
50. The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Validation) Act, 1961
(Mysore Act XXXVI of 1961).
51. The Mysore Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Mysore Act X of 1962).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
330
52. The Orissa Land Reforms Act, 1960 (Orissa Act XVI of 1960).
53. The Orissa Merged Territories (Village Offices Abolition) Act, 1963
(Orissa Act X of 1963).
54. The Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 (Punjab Act X of 1953).
55. The Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (Rajasthan Act III of 1955).
56. The Rajasthan Zamindari and Biswedari Abolition Act, 1959
(Rajasthan Act VIII of 1959).
57. The Kumaun and Uttarakhand Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms
Act, 1960 (Uttar Pradesh Act XVII of 1960).
58. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960
(Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1961).
59. The West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 (West Bengal Act I of 1954).
60. The West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 (West Bengal Act X of 1956).
61. The Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 (Delhi Act VIII of 1954).
62. The Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Act, 1960 (Central Act 24 of 1960).
63. The Manipur Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960
(Central Act 33 of 1960).
64. The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960
(Central Act 43 of 1960). 1
[65. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969
(Kerala Act 35 of 1969).
66. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1971
(Kerala Act 25 of 1971).] 2
[67. The Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural
Holdings) Act, 1973 (Andhra Pradesh Act 1 of 1973).
68. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Bihar Act I of 1973). ______________________________________________
1. Entries 65 and 66 ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2
(w.e.f. 9-6-1972).
2. Entries 67 and 86 ins.. by the Constitution (Thirty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2
(w.e.f. 7-9-1974).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
331
69. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1973 (Bihar Act IX of 1973).
70. The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Bihar Act V of
1972).
71. The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling (Amendment) Act, 1972
(Gujarat Act 2 of 1974).
72. The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1972 (Haryana Act 26 of 1972).
73. The Himachal Pradesh Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1972 (Himachal
Pradesh Act 19 of 1973).
74. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Kerala Act 17 of 1972).
75. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment)
Act, 1972 (Madhya Pradesh Act 12 of 1974).
76. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Second
Amendment) Act, 1972 (Madhya Pradesh Act 13 of 1974).
77. The Mysore Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1973
(Karnataka Act 1 of 1974).
78. The Punjab Land Reforms Act, 1972 (Punjab Act 10 of 1973).
79. The Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act,
1973 (Rajasthan Act 11 of 1973).
80. The Gudalur Janmam Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari)
Act, 1969 (Tamil Nadu Act 24 of 1969).
81. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 (West
Bengal Act XII of 1972).
82. The West Bengal Estates Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1964 (West
Bengal Act XXII of 1964).
83. The West Bengal Estates Acquisition (Second Amendment) Act, 1973
(West Bengal Act XXXIII of 1973).
84. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Gujarat Amendment)
Act, 1972 (Gujarat Act 5 of 1973).
85. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Orissa Act 9 of
1974).
86. The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Second Amendment)
Act, 1974 (Tripura Act 7 of 1974).]
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
332
1
[2
87* * * * *]
88. The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (Central Act
65 of 1951).
89. The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952
(Central Act 30 of 1952).
90. The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957
(Central Act 67 of 1957).
91. The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (Central
Act 54 of 1969). 2
[92* * * * *]
93. The Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 (Central
Act 64 of 1971).
94. The Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (Central Act 36 of
1972).
95. The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (Central
Act 57 of 1972).
96. The Indian Copper Corporation (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1972
(Central Act 58 of 1972).
97. The Sick Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Act,
1972 (Central Act 72 of 1972).
98. The Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973 (Central Act
15 of 1973).
99. The Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 (Central Act 26 of 1973).
100. The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (Central Act 46 of
1973).
101. The Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of Undertakings) Act, 1973 (Central Act 56 of 1973). ______________________________________________
1. Entries 87 to 124 ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5
(w.e.f. 10-8-1975).
2. Entries 87 and 92 omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 44 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
Rep. by the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003) s. 66 (w.e.f. 1-9-2009).
Rep. by the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), s. 49 (w.e.f. 1-6-2000).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
333
102. The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 (Central
Act 28 of 1974).
103. The Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act, 1974 (Central
Act 37 of 1974).
104. The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling
Activities Act, 1974 (Central Act 52 of 1974).
105. The Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 (Central
Act 57 of 1974).
106. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings)
(Amendment) Act, 1964 (Maharashtra Act XVI of 1965).
107. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings)
(Amendment) Act, 1965 (Maharashtra Act XXXII of 1965).
108. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings)
(Amendment) Act, 1968 (Maharashtra Act XVI of 1968).
109. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Second
Amendment) Act, 1968 (Maharashtra Act XXXIII of 1968).
110. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings)
(Amendment) Act, 1969 (Maharashtra Act XXXVII of 1969).
111. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Second
Amendment) Act, 1969 (Maharashtra Act XXXVIII of 1969).
112. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings)
(Amendment) Act, 1970 (Maharashtra Act XXVII of 1970).
113. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings)
(Amendment) Act, 1972 (Maharashtra Act XIII of 1972).
114. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings)
(Amendment) Act, 1973 (Maharashtra Act L of 1973).
115. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965 (Orissa Act 13 of
1965).
116. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1966 (Orissa Act 8 of
1967).
117. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1967 (Orissa Act 13 of
1967). 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
334
118. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969 (Orissa Act 13 of
1969).
119. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Orissa Act 18 of
1970).
120. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings
(Amendment) Act, 1972 (Uttar Pradesh Act 18 of 1973).
121. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings
(Amendment) Act, 1974 (Uttar Pradesh Act 2 of 1975).
122. The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Third Amendment)
Act, 1975 (Tripura Act 3 of 1975).
123.The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms Regulation, 1971 (3 of 1971).
124. The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms (Amendment)
Regulation, 1973 (5 of 1973).] 1
[125. Section 66A and Chapter IVA of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939
(Central Act 4 of 1939).
126. The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (Central Act 10 of 1955).
127. The Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of
Property) Act, 1976 (Central Act 13 of 1976).
128. The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 (Central Act 19 of
1976).
129. The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling
Activities (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Central Act 20 of 1976). 2
130* * * * *
131. The Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act, 1976 (Central Act 31 of
1976).
132. The Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 (Central Act 33
of 1976). ______________________________________________
1. Entries 125 to 188 ins. by the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 3
(w.e.f. 27-5-1976).
See now the relevant provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988).
2. Entry 130 omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 44
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
335
133. The Departmentalisation of Union Accounts (Transfer of Personnel)
Act, 1976 (Central Act 59 of 1976).
134. The Assam Fixation of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1956 (Assam
Act I of 1957).
135. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region) Act,
1958 (Bombay Act XCIX of 1958).
136. The Gujarat Private Forests (Acquisition) Act, 1972 (Gujarat Act 14
of 1973).
137. The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1976
(Haryana Act 17 of 1976).
138. The Himachal Pradesh Tenancy and Land Reforms Act, 1972
(Himachal Pradesh Act 8 of 1974).
139. The Himachal Pradesh Village Common Lands Vesting and
Utilisation Act, 1974 (Himachal Pradesh Act 18 of 1974).
140. The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment and Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 1974 (Karnataka Act 31 of 1974).
141. The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976
(Karnataka Act 27 of 1976).
142. The Kerala Prevention of Eviction Act, 1966 (Kerala Act 12 of 1966).
143. The Thiruppuvaram Payment (Abolition) Act, 1969 (Kerala Act 19 of 1969).
144. The Sreepadam Lands Enfranchisement Act, 1969 (Kerala Act 20 of
1969).
145. The Sree Pandaravaka Lands (Vesting and Enfranchisement) Act,
1971 (Kerala Act 20 of 1971).
146. The Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act, 1971
(Kerala Act 26 of 1971).
147. The Kerala Agricultural Workers Act, 1974 (Kerala Act 18 of 1974).
148. The Kerala Cashew Factories (Acquisition) Act, 1974 (Kerala Act 29
of 1974).
149. The Kerala Chitties Act, 1975 (Kerala Act 23 of 1975).
150. The Kerala Scheduled Tribes (Restriction on Transfer of Lands and
Restoration of Alienated Lands) Act, 1975 (Kerala Act 31 of 1975).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
336
151. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Kerala Act 15 of
1976).
152. The Kanam Tenancy Abolition Act, 1976 (Kerala Act 16 of 1976).
153. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment)
Act, 1974 (Madhya Pradesh Act 20 of 1974).
154. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment)
Act, 1975 (Madhya Pradesh Act 2 of 1976).
155. The West Khandesh Mehwassi Estates (Proprietary Rights Abolition,
etc.) Regulation, 1961 (Maharashtra Regulation 1 of 1962).
156. The Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes Act, 1974
(Maharashtra Act XIV of 1975).
157. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on
Holdings) and (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Maharashtra Act XXI of 1975).
158. The Maharashtra Private Forest (Acquisition) Act, 1975 (Maharashtra
Act XXIX of 1975).
159. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on
Holdings) and (Amendment) Amendment Act, 1975 (Maharashtra Act XLVII
of 1975).
160. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings)
(Amendment) Act, 1975 (Maharashtra Act II of 1976).
161. The Orissa Estates Abolition Act, 1951 (Orissa Act I of 1952).
162. The Rajasthan Colonisation Act, 1954 (Rajasthan Act XXVII of 1954).
163. The Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acquisition of Landowners’ Estates
Act, 1963 (Rajasthan Act 11 of 1964).
164. The Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (Rajasthan Act 8 of 1976).
165. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Rajasthan Act 12 of
1976).
166. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Reduction of Ceiling on Land) Act,
1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970).
167. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
Amendment Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
337
168. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1972).
169. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972).
170. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Third
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972).
171. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Fourth
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972).
172. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Sixth
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1974).
173. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Fifth
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1974).
174. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
Amendment Act, 1974 (Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1974).
175. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Third
Amendment Act, 1974 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1974).
176. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second
Amendment Act, 1974 (Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 1974).
177. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
Amendment Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1975).
178. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second
Amendment Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1975).
179. Amendments made to the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and
Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1951) by the Uttar Pradesh
Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Uttar Pradesh Act 21 of 1971) and the
Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Uttar Pradesh Act 34 of
1974).
180. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (Uttar Pradesh Act 20 of 1976).
181. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1972
(West Bengal Act XXVIII of 1972).
182. The West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land Act, 1973 (West
Bengal Act XXIII of 1973).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
338
183. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1974 (West
Bengal Act XXXIII of 1974).
184. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1975 (West
Bengal Act XXIII of 1975).
185. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976 (West
Bengal Act XII of 1976).
186. The Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Amendment Act, 1976 (Central
Act 15 of 1976).
187. The Goa, Daman and Diu Mundkars (Protection from Eviction) Act,
1975 (Goa, Daman and Diu Act 1 of 1976).
188. The Pondicherry Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act,
1973 (Pondicherry Act 9 of 1974).] 1
[189. The Assam (Temporarily Settled Areas) Tenancy Act, 1971 (Assam
Act XXIII of 1971).
190. The Assam (Temporarily Settled Areas) Tenancy (Amendment) Act,
1974 (Assam Act XVIII of 1974).
191. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Amending Act, 1974 (Bihar Act 13 of 1975).
192. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Bihar Act 22 of 1976).
193. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1978 (Bihar Act VII of 1978).
194. The Land Acquisition (Bihar Amendment) Act, 1979 (Bihar Act 2 of
1980).
195. The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1977
(Haryana Act 14 of 1977).
196. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
Amendment Act, 1978 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1978).
197. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
Amendment Act, 1979 (Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979). ______________________________________________
1. Entries 189 to 202 were ins. by the Constitution (Forty-seventh Amendment)
Act, 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26-8-1984).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
339
198. The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978
(Uttar Pradesh Act 15 of 1978).
199. The West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land (Amendment) Act,
1978 (West Bengal Act XXIV of 1978).
200. The West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land (Amendment) Act,
1980 (West Bengal Act LVI of 1980).
201. The Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1964 (Goa,
Daman and Diu Act 7 of 1964).
202. The Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy (Fifth Amendment)
Act, 1976 (Goa, Daman and Diu Act 17 of 1976).] 1
[203. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer Regulation,
1959 (Andhra Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1959).
204. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Laws (Extension and
Amendment) Regulation, 1963 (Andhra Pradesh Regulation 2 of 1963).
205. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer (Amendment)
Regulation, 1970 (Andhra Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1970).
206. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer (Amendment)
Regulation, 1971 (Andhra Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1971).
207. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer (Amendment)
Regulation, 1978 (Andhra Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1978).
208. The Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 (Bihar Act 8 of 1885).
209. The Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 (Bengal Act 6 of 1908)
(Chapter VIII—sections 46, 47, 48, 48A and 49; Chapter X—sections 71, 71A
and 71B; and Chapter XVIII—sections 240, 241 and 242).
210. The Santhal Parganas Tenancy (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 1949
(Bihar Act 14 of 1949) except section 53.
211. The Bihar Scheduled Areas Regulation, 1969 (Bihar Regulation 1 of 1969).
212. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1982 (Bihar Act 55 of 1982). ______________________________________________
1. Entries 203 to 257 were ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1990,
s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-6-1990).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
340
213. The Gujarat Devasthan Inams Abolition Act, 1969 (Gujarat Act 16 of
1969).
214. The Gujarat Tenancy Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Gujarat Act 37
of 1976).
215. The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling (Amendment) Act, 1976
(President's Act 43 of 1976).
216. The Gujarat Devasthan Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1977
(Gujarat Act 27 of 1977).
217. The Gujarat Tenancy Laws (Amendment) Act, 1977 (Gujarat Act 30
of 1977).
218. The Bombay Land Revenue (Gujarat Second Amendment) Act, 1980
(Gujarat Act 37 of 1980).
219. The Bombay Land Revenue Code and Land Tenure Abolition Laws
(Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1982 (Gujarat Act 8 of 1982).
220. The Himachal Pradesh Transfer of Land (Regulation) Act, 1968
(Himachal Pradesh Act 15 of 1969).
221. The Himachal Pradesh Transfer of Land (Regulation) (Amendment)
Act, 1986 (Himachal Pradesh Act 16 of 1986).
222. The Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of
Transfer of Certain Lands) Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1979).
223. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1978 (Kerala Act 13 of 1978).
224. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981 (Kerala Act 19 of
1981).
225. The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Third Amendment) Act,
1976 (Madhya Pradesh Act 61 of 1976).
226. The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Amendment) Act, 1980
(Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 1980).
227. The Madhya Pradesh Akrishik Jot Uchchatam Seema Adhiniyam,
1981 (Madhya Pradesh Act 11 of 1981).
228. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Second
Amendment) Act, 1976 (Madhya Pradesh Act 1 of 1984).
229. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment)
Act, 1984 (Madhya Pradesh Act 14 of 1984).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
341
230. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment)
Act, 1989 (Madhya Pradesh Act 8 of 1989).
231. The Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 (Maharashtra Act 41 of
1966), sections 36, 36A and 36B.
232. The Maharashtra Land Revenue Code and the Maharashtra
Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes (Second Amendment) Act, 1976
(Maharashtra Act 30 of 1977).
233. The Maharashtra Abolition of Subsisting Proprietary Rights to Mines
and Minerals in certain Lands Act, 1985 (Maharashtra Act 16 of 1985).
234. The Orissa Scheduled Areas Transfer of Immovable Property (by
Scheduled Tribes) Regulation, 1956 (Orissa Regulation 2 of 1956).
235. The Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa
Act 29 of 1976).
236. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa Act 30 of 1976).
237. The Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa
Act 44 of 1976).
238. The Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act, 1984 (Rajasthan Act
12 of 1984).
239. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1984 (Rajasthan Act 13 of
1984).
240. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1987 (Rajasthan Act 21 of
1987).
241. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second
Amendment Act, 1979 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1980).
242. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
Amendment Act, 1980 (Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1980).
243. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
Amendment Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 59 of 1981).
244. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second
Amendment Act, 1983 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1984).
245. The Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1982 (Uttar Pradesh
Act 20 of 1982).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
342
246. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965 (West
Bengal Act 18 of 1965).
247. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1966 (West
Bengal Act 11 of 1966).
248. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1969
(West Bengal Act 23 of 1969).
249. The West Bengal Estate Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1977 (West
Bengal Act 36 of 1977).
250. The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue Act, 1979 (West Bengal Act
44 of 1979).
251. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1980 (West
Bengal Act 41 of 1980).
252. The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1981
(West Bengal Act 33 of 1981).
253. The Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 1981
(West Bengal Act 37 of 1981).
254. The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1982
(West Bengal Act 23 of 1982).
255. The Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation)
(Amendment) Act, 1984 (West Bengal Act 41 of 1984).
256. The Mahe Land Reforms Act, 1968 (Pondicherry Act 1 of 1968).
257. The Mahe Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1980 (Pondicherry Act 1
of 1981).] 1
[257A. The Tamil Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutions and of
appointments or posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1993 (Tamil Nadu
Act 45 of 1994).] ______________________________________________
1. Entry 257A ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-sixth Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f.
31-8-1994).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
343
1
[258. The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy Act, 1947 (Bihar
Act 4 of 1948).
259. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation
Act, 1956 (Bihar Act 22 of 1956).
260. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation
(Amendment) Act, 1970 (Bihar Act 7 of 1970).
261. The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy (Amendment) Act,
1970 (Bihar Act 9 of 1970).
262. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation
(Amendment) Act, 1973 (Bihar Act 27 of 1975).
263. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation
(Amendment) Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 35 of 1982).
264. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1987 (Bihar Act 21 of 1987).
265. The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy (Amendment) Act,
1989 (Bihar Act 11 of 1989).
266. The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Bihar Act 11 of 1990).
267. The Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of
Transfer of Certain Lands) (Amendment) Act, 1984 (Karnataka Act 3 of 1984).
268. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Kerala Act 16 of 1989).
269. The Kerala Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1989 (Kerala
Act 2 of 1990).
270. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Orissa Act 9 of
1990).
271. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1979 (Rajasthan Act 16 of 1979).
272. The Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act, 1987 (Rajasthan Act 2
of 1987).
273. The Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Rajasthan Act
12 of 1989). ______________________________________________
1. Entries 258 to 284 ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-eighth Amendment) Act, 1995,
s. 2 (w.e.f. 30-8-1995).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
344
274. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
Amendment Act, 1983 (Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984).
275. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
Amendment Act, 1986 (Tamil Nadu Act 57 of 1986).
276. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second
Amendment Act, 1987 (Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988).
277. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)
(Amendment) Act, 1989 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1989).
278. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981 (West
Bengal Act 50 of 1981).
279. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1986 (West
Bengal Act 5 of 1986).
280. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1986
(West Bengal Act 19 of 1986).
281. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Third Amendment) Act, 1986 (West
Bengal Act 35 of 1986).
282. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (West
Bengal Act 23 of 1989).
283. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1990 (West
Bengal Act 24 of 1990).
284. The West Bengal Land Reforms Tribunal Act, 1991 (West Bengal Act
12 of 1991).]
Explanation:—Any acquisition made under the Rajasthan Tenancy Act,
1955 (Rajasthan Act 3 of 1955), in contravention of the second proviso to
clause(1) of article 31A shall, to the entent of the contravention, be void.]
345
1
[TENTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 102(2) and 191(2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection
1.Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "House" means either House of Parliament or the Legislative
Assembly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State;
(b) "legislature party", in relation to a member of a House
belonging to any political party in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 2 or 2
*** paragraph 4, means the group consisting of all the
members of that House for the time being belonging to that political
party in accordance with the said provisions;
(c) "original political party", in relation to a member of a House,
means the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of subparagraph (1) of paragraph 2;
(d) "paragraph" means a paragraph of this Schedule.
2. Disqualification on ground of defection.—(1) Subject to the
provisions of 3
[paragraphs 4 and 5], a member of a House belonging to any
political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House—(a) if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political
party; or
(b) if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to
any direction issued by the political party to which he belongs or by any
person or authority authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in
either case, the prior permission of such political party, person or
authority and such voting or abstention has not been condoned by such
political party, person or authority within fifteen days from the date of
such voting or abstention.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,—(a) an elected member of a House shall be deemed to belong to
the political party, if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for
election as such member;
(b) a nominated member of a House shall,—______________________________________________
1. Tenth Schedule added by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 6
(w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
2. Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5
(w.e.f. 1-1-2004).
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for "paragraphs 3, 4 and 5" (w.e.f. 1-1-2004).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Tenth Schedule)
346
(i) where he is a member of any political party on the date
of his nomination as such member, be deemed to belong to such
political party;
(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political
party of which he becomes, or, as the case may be, first becomes,
a member before the expiry of six months from the date on which
he takes his seat after complying with the requirements of article
99 or, as the case may be, article 188.
(2) An elected member of a House who has been elected as such otherwise
than as a candidate set up by any political party shall be disqualified for being a
member of the House if he joins any political party after such election.
(3) A nominated member of a House shall be disqualified for being a
member of the House if he joins any political party after the expiry of six
months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying with the
requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of
this paragraph, a person who, on the commencement of the Constitution (Fiftysecond Amendment) Act, 1985, is a member of a House (whether elected or
nominated as such) shall,—
(i) where he was a member of political party immediately before
such commencement, be deemed, for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1)
of this paragraph, to have been elected as a member of such House as a
candidate set up by such political party;
(ii) in any other case, be deemed to be an elected member of the
House who has been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up
by any political party for the purposes of sub-paragraph (2) of this
paragraph or, as the case may be, be deemed to be a nominated member
of the House for the purposes of sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph. 1
* * * * *
4. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of
merger.— (1) A member of a House shall not be disqualified under
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 where his original political party merges with
another political party and he claims that he and any other members of his
original political party—
(a) have become members of such other political party or, as the
case may be, of a new political party formed by such merger; or
(b) have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a
separate group, ______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 3 omitted by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5
(w.e.f. 1-1-2004).
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Tenth Schedule)
347
and from the time of such merger, such other political party or new political
party or group, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to
which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to
be his original political party for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.
(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger
of the original political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have
taken place if, and only if, not less than two-thirds of the members of the
legislature party concerned have agreed to such merger.
5. Exemption.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, a
person who has been elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker
of the House of the People or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or
the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State or
the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State, shall
not be disqualified under this Schedule,—(a) if he, by reason of his election to such office, voluntarily gives
up the membership of the political party to which he belonged
immediately before such election and does not, so long as he continues
to hold such office thereafter, rejoin that political party or become a
member of another political party; or
(b) if he, having given up by reason of his election to such office his
membership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before
such election, rejoins such political party after he ceases to hold such office.
6. Decision on questions as to disqualification on ground of
defection.—(1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has
become subject to disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be
referred for the decision of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of
such House and his decision shall be final:
Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the
Chairman or the Speaker of a House has become subject to such disqualification,
the question shall be referred for the decision of such member of the House as the
House may elect in this behalf and his decision shall be final.
(2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation
to any question as to disqualification of a member of a House under this
Schedule shall be deemed to be proceedings in Parliament within the meaning
of article 122 or, as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature of a State
within the meaning of article 212.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Tenth Schedule)
348
*7. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.—Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, no court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of any matter
connected with the disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule.
8. Rules.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this
paragraph, the Chairman or the Speaker of a House may make rules for giving
effect to the provisions of this Schedule, and in particular, and without
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such rules may provide for—(a) the maintenance of registers or other records as to the political
parties, if any, to which different members of the House belong;
(b) the report which the leader of a legislature party in relation to a
member of a House shall furnish with regard to any condonation of the
nature referred to in clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 in
respect of such member, the time within which and the authority to
whom such report shall be furnished;
(c) the reports which a political party shall furnish with regard to
admission to such political party of any members of the House and the
officer of the House to whom such reports shall be furnished; and
(d) the procedure for deciding any question referred to in
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6 including the procedure for any inquiry
which may be made for the purpose of deciding such question.
(2) The rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House under
sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be laid as soon as may be after they
are made before the House for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and shall take
effect upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days unless they are sooner
approved with or without modifications or disapproved by the House and
where they are so approved, they shall take effect on such approval in the form
in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be, and
where they are so disapproved, they shall be of no effect.
(3) The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to
the provisions of article 105 or, as the case may be, article 194, and to any other
power which he may have under this Constitution direct that any wilful
contravention by any person of the rules made under this paragraph may be
dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the House.] ______________________________________________
* Paragraph 7 declared invalid for want of ratification in accordance with the proviso to clause (2) of
article 368 as per majority opinion in Kihoto Hollohon Vs. Zachilhu and Others A.I.R. 1993
SC 412.
349
1
[ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
(Article 243G)
1. Agriculture, including agricultural extension.
2. Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, land
consolidation and soil conservation.
3. Minor irrigation, water management and watershed
development.
4. Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry.
5. Fisheries.
6. Social forestry and farm forestry.
7. Minor forest produce.
8. Small scale industries, including food processing industries.
9. Khadi, village and cottage industries.
10. Rural housing.
11. Drinking water.
12. Fuel and fodder.
13. Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of
communication.
14. Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity.
15. Non-conventional energy sources.
16. Poverty alleviation programme.
17. Education, including primary and secondary schools.
18. Technical training and vocational education.
19. Adult and non-formal education.
20. Libraries.
21. Cultural activities.
22. Markets and fairs.
23. Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health
centres and dispensaries.
24. Family welfare.
25. Women and child development.
26. Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and
mentally retarded.
27. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
28. Public distribution system.
29. Maintenance of community assets.] ______________________________________________
1. Eleventh Schedule added by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992,
s. 4 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993).
350
1
[TWELFTH SCHEDULE
(Article 243W)
1. Urban planning including town planning.
2. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings.
3. Planning for economic and social development.
4. Roads and bridges.
5. Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes.
6. Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste
management.
7. Fire services.
8. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of
ecological aspects.
9. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society,
including the handicapped and mentally retarded.
10. Slum improvement and upgradation.
11. Urban poverty alleviation.
12. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks,
gardens, playgrounds.
13. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects.
14. Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; and
electric crematoriums.
15. Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals.
16. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.
17. Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops
and public conveniences.
18. Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.] ______________________________________________
1. Twelfth Schedule added by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 4
(w.e.f. 1-6-1993). 
351
APPENDIX I
THE CONSTITUTION ( ONE HUNDREDTH AMENDMENT)
ACT, 2015
[28th May, 2015.]
An Act further to amend the Constitution of India to give effect to the acquiring
of territories by India and transfer of certain territories to Bangladesh in
pursuance of the agreement and its protocol entered into between the
Governments of India and Bangladesh.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. Short title.—This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundredth
Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. Definitions.—In this Act,—
(a) “acquired territory” means so much of the territories comprised in
the India-Bangladesh agreement and its protocol and referred to in the
First Schedule as are demarcated for the purpose of being acquired by
India from Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreement and its protocol
referred to in clause (c);
(b) “appointed day” means such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as the date for
acquisition of territories from Bangladesh and transfer of the territories to
Bangladesh in pursuance of the India-Bangladesh agreement and its
protocol, after causing the territories to be so acquired and transferred as
referred to in the First Schedule and Second Schedule and demarcated for the
purpose;
(c) “India-Bangladesh agreement” means the agreement between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh concerning the Demarcation of the Land
Boundary between India and Bangladesh and Related Matters dated the
16th day of May, 1974, Exchange of Letters dated the 26th day of
December, 1974, the 30th day of December, 1974, the 7th day of October,
1982, the 26th day of March, 1992 and protocol to the said agreement dated
the 6th day of September, 2011, entered into between the Governments of
India and Bangladesh, the relevant extracts of which are set out in the
Third Schedule; ______________________________________________
31st day of July, 2015, vide notification No. S.O. 2094(E), dated 31st July, 2015.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
352
(d) “transferred territory”, means so much of the territories
comprised in the India-Bangladesh agreement and its protocol and
referred to in the Second Schedule as are demarcated for the purpose of
being transferred by India to Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreements
and its protocol referred to in clause (c).
3. Amendment of First Schedule to Constitution.— As from the
appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Constitution,—(a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of
Assam, the words, brackets and figures “and the territories referred to in
Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth
Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(a) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far
as it relates to the territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule
to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015”, shall be
added at the end;
(b) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of West
Bengal, the words, brackets and figures “and also the territories referred to
in Part III of the First Schedule but excluding the territories referred to in
Part III of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth
Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c)
of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it
relates to the territories referred to in Part III of the First Schedule and the
territories referred to in Part III of the Second Schedule to the
Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015”, shall be added at
the end;
(c) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of
Meghalaya, the words, brackets and figures “and the territories referred to in
Part I of the First Schedule but excluding the territories referred to in Part
II of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth
Amendment) Act, 2015”, shall be added at the end;
(d) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Tripura,
the words, brackets and figures “and the territories referred to in Part II of the
First Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act,
2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) of section 3 of the
Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the
territories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Constitution
(One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015”, shall be added at the end.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
353
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(a), 2(b) and 3]
PA R T I
The acquired territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the
16th day of May, 1974 and Article 3 (I) (b) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) of the protocol dated the
6th day of September, 2011.
PA RT I I
The acquired territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the
16th day of May, 1974 and Article 3 (I) (c) (i) of the protocol dated the 6th day of
September, 2011.
PART III
The acquired territory in relation to Articles 1(12) and 2 of the agreement
dated the 16th day of May, 1974 and Articles 2 (II), 3 (I) (a) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) of the
protocol dated the 6th day of September, 2011.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(b), 2(d) and 3]
PA R T I
The transferred territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated 16th
day of May, 1974 and Article 3 (I) (d) (i) (ii) of the protocol dated 6th day of
September, 2011.
PA RT I I
The transferred territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the
16th day of May, 1974 and Article 3 (I) (b) (i) of the protocol dated 6th day of
September, 2011.
PART III
The transferred territory in relation to Articles 1(12) and 2 of the
agreement dated the 16th day of May, 1974 and Articles 2 (II), 3 (I) (a) (i) (ii) (vi)
of the protocol dated the 6th day of September, 2011.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
354
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 2(c)]
I. EXTRACTS FROM THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OF
THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH CONCERNING THE DEMARCATION OF
THE LAND BOUNDARY BETWEEN INDIA AND BANGLADESH AND
RELATED MATTERS DATED THE 16TH DAY OF MAY, 1974
Article 1 (12): ENCLAVES
The Indian enclaves in Bangladesh and the Bangladesh enclaves in India
should be exchanged expeditiously, excepting the enclaves mentioned in paragraph
14 without claim to compensation for the additional area going to Bangladesh.
Article 2:
The Governments of India and Bangladesh agree that territories in adverse
possession in areas already demarcated in respect of which boundary strip maps
are already prepared, shall be exchanged within six months of the signing of the
boundary strip maps by the plenipotentiaries. They may sign the relevant maps
as early as possible as and in any case not later than the 31st December, 1974.
Early measures may be taken to print maps in respect of other areas where
demarcation has already taken place. These should be printed by the 31st May,
1975 and signed by the plenipotentiaries thereafter in order that the exchange of
adversely held possessions in these areas may take place by the 31st December,
1975. In sectors still to be demarcated, transfer of territorial jurisdiction may
take place within six months of the signature by plenipotentiaries on the
concerned boundary strip maps.
II. EXTRACTS FROM THE PROTOCOL TO THE AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH
CONCERNING THE DEMARCATION OF THE LAND BOUNDARY
BETWEEN INDIA AND BANGLADESH AND RELATED MATTERS,
DATED THE 6TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2011
Article 2:
(II) Article 1 Clause 12 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as
follows:—
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
355
Enclaves
111 Indian Enclaves in Bangladesh and 51 Bangladesh Enclaves in India
as per the jointly verified cadastral enclave maps and signed at the level of
DGLR&S, Bangladesh and DLR&S, West Bengal (India) in April, 1997, shall be
exchanged without claim to compensation for the additional areas going to
Bangladesh.
Article 3:
(I) Article 2 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as follows:—The Government of India and the Government of Bangladesh agree
that the boundary shall be drawn as a fixed boundary for territories held in
Adverse Possession as determined through joint survey and fully depicted
in the respective adversely possessed land area Index Map (APL map)
finalised by the Land Records and Survey Departments of both the
countries between December, 2010 and August, 2011, which are fully
described in clause (a) to (d) below.
The relevant strip maps shall be printed and signed by the
Plenipotentiaries and transfer of territorial jurisdiction shall be completed
simultaneously with the exchange of enclaves. The demarcation of the
boundary, as depicted in the above-mentioned Index Maps, shall be as
under:—
 (a) West Bengal Sector
(i) Bousmari – Madhugari (Kushtia-Nadia) area
The boundary shall be drawn from the existing
Boundary Pillar Nos. 154/5-S to 157/1-S to follow the
centre of old course of river Mathabanga, as depicted
in consolidation map of 1962, as surveyed jointly and
agreed in June, 2011.
(ii) Andharkota (Kushtia-Nadia) area
The boundary shall be drawn from existing
Boundary Pillar No. 152/5-S to Boundary Pillar No.
153/1-S to follow the edge of existing River
Mathabanga as jointly surveyed and agreed in June,
2011.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
356
(iii) Pakuria (Kushtia-Nadia) area
The boundary shall be drawn from existing
Boundary Pillar No. 151/1-S to Boundary Pillar No.
152/2-S to follow the edge of River Mathabanga as
jointly surveyed and agreed in June, 2011.
(iv) Char Mahishkundi (Kushtia-Nadia) area
The boundary shall be drawn from existing
Boundary Pillar No. 153/1-S to Boundary Pillar No.
153/9-S to follow the edge of River Mathabanga as
jointly surveyed and agreed in June, 2011.
(v) Haripal/Khutadah/Battoli/Sapameri/LNpur (Patari)
(Naogaon-Malda) area
The boundary shall be drawn as line joining
from existing Boundary Pillar No. 242/S/13, to
Boundary Pillar No. 243/7-S/5 and as jointly
surveyed and agreed in June, 2011.
(vi) Berubari (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri area)
The boundary in the area Berubari
(Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri) adversely held by
Bangladesh, and Berubari and Singhapara-Khudipara
(Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri), adversely held by India shall
be drawn as jointly demarcated during 1996-1998.
(b) Meghalaya Sector
(i) Lobachera-Nuncherra
The boundary from existing Boundary Pillar
No. 1315/4-S to Boundary Pillar No. 1315/15-S in
Lailong - Balichera, Boundary Pillar No. 1316/1-S to
Boundary Pillar No. 1316/11-S in Lailong- Noonchera,
Boundary Pillar No. 1317 to Boundary Pillar No.
1317/13-S in Lailong- Lahiling and Boundary Pillar
No. 1318/1-S to Boundary Pillar No. 1318/2-S in
Lailong- Lobhachera shall be drawn to follow the edge
of tea gardens as jointly surveyed and agreed in
December, 2010.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
357
(ii) Pyrdiwah/ Padua Area
The boundary shall be drawn from existing
Boundary Pillar No. 1270/1-S as per jointly surveyed
and mutually agreed line till Boundary Pillar No.
1271/1-T. The Parties agree that the Indian Nationals
from Pyrdiwah village shall be allowed to draw water
from Piyang River near point No. 6 of the agreed
Map.
(iii) Lyngkhat Area
(aa) Lyngkhat-I/Kulumcherra and LyngkhatII/ Kulumcherra
The boundary shall be drawn from
existing Boundary Pillar No. 1264/4-S to
Boundary Pillar No. 1265 and BP No. 1265/6-S to
1265/9-S as per jointly surveyed and mutually
agreed line.
(ab) Lyngkhat-III/Sonarhat
The boundary shall be drawn from
existing Boundary Pillar No. 1266/13-S along
the nallah southwards till it meets another
nallah in the east-west direction, thereafter it
shall run along the northern edge of the nallah in
east till it meets the existing International
Boundary north of Reference Pillar
Nos.1267/4-R-B and 1267/3-R-I.
(iv) Dawki/Tamabil area
The boundary shall be drawn by a straight line
joining existing Boundary Pillar Nos. 1275/1-S to
Boundary Pillar Nos. 1275/7-S. The Parties agree to
fencing on ‘zero line’ in this area.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
358
(v) Naljuri/Sreepur Area
(aa) Naljuri I
The boundary shall be a line from the
existing Boundary Pillar No. 1277/2-S in
southern direction up to three plots as
depicted in the strip Map No. 166 till it meets
the nallah flowing from Boundary Pillar No.
1277/5-T, thereafter it will run along the western
edge of the nallah in the southern direction up
to 2 plots on the Bangladesh side, thereafter it
shall run eastwards till it meets a line drawn in
southern direction from Boundary Pillar No.
1277/4-S.
(ab) Naljuri III
The boundary shall be drawn by a
straight line from existing Boundary Pillar No.
1278/2-S to Boundary Pillar No. 1279/ 3-S.
(vi) Muktapur/ Dibir Hawor Area
The Parties agree that the Indian Nationals shall
be allowed to visit Kali Mandir and shall also be
allowed to draw water and exercise fishing rights in
the water body in the Muktapur / Dibir Hawor area
from the bank of Muktapur side.
(c) Tripura Sector
Chandannagar-Champarai Tea Garden area in
Tripura/ Moulvi Bazar sector
The boundary shall be drawn along Sonaraichhera
river from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1904 to Boundary
Pillar No. 1905 as surveyed jointly and agreed in July, 2011.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
359
(d) Assam Sector
(i) Kalabari (Boroibari) area in Assam sector
The boundary shall be drawn from existing
Boundary Pillar No. 1066/24-T to Boundary Pillar
No. 1067/16-T as surveyed jointly and agreed in
August, 2011.
(ii) Pallathal area in Assam sector
The boundary shall be drawn from existing
Boundary Pillar No. 1370/3-S to 1371/ 6-S to follow the
outer edge of the tea garden and from Boundary Pillar
No. 1372 to 1373/2-S along outer edge of the pan
plantation.
III. LIST OF EXCHANGE OF ENCLAVES BETWEEN INDIA AND
BANGLADESH IN PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 1 (12) OF THE AGREEMENT
DATED 16TH MAY, 1974 AND THE PROTOCOL TO THE AGREEMENT
DATED 6TH SEPTEMBER, 2011
A. EXCHANGEABLE INDIAN ENCLAVES IN BANGLADESH WITH
AREA
Sl. Name of Chhits
No.
Chhit No. Lying within
Police station
Bangladesh
Lying within
Police station
W. Bengal
Area
in acres 1 2 3 4 5 6
A. Enclaves with independent chhits
1. Garati 75 Pochagar Haldibari 58.232. Garati 76 Pochagar Haldibari 0.793. Garati 77 Pochagar Haldibari 184. Garati 78 Pochagar Haldibari 958.665. Garati 79 Pochagar Haldibari 1.746. Garati 80 Pochagar Haldibari 73.757. Bingimari Part-I 73 Pochagar Haldibari 6.07
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
360
1 2 3 4 5 6
8. Nazirganja 41 Boda Haldibari 58.329. Nazirganja 42 Boda Haldibari 434.2910. Nazirganja 44 Boda Haldibari 53.4711. Nazirganja 45 Boda Haldibari 1.0712. Nazirganja 46 Boda Haldibari 17.9513. Nazirganja 47 Boda Haldibari 3.8914. Nazirganja 48 Boda Haldibari 73.2715. Nazirganja 49 Boda Haldibari 49.0516. Nazirganja 50 Boda Haldibari 5.0517. Nazirganja 51 Boda Haldibari 0.7718. Nazirganja 52 Boda Haldibari 1.0419. Nazirganja 53 Boda Haldibari 1.0220. Nazirganja 54 Boda Haldibari 3.8721. Nazirganja 55 Boda Haldibari 12.1822. Nazirganja 56 Boda Haldibari 54.0423. Nazirganja 57 Boda Haldibari 8.2724. Nazirganja 58 Boda Haldibari 14.2225. Nazirganja 60 Boda Haldibari 0.5226. Putimari 59 Boda Haldibari 122.827. Daikhata Chhat 38 Boda Haldibari 499.2128. Salbari 37 Boda Haldibari 1188.9329. Kajal Dighi 36 Boda Haldibari 771.4430. Nataktoka 32 Boda Haldibari 162.2631. Nataktoka 33 Boda Haldibari 0.2632. Beuladanga
Chhat
35 Boda Haldibari 0.8333. Balapara
Iagrabar
3 Debiganj Haldibari 1752.4434. Bara
Khankikharija
Citaldaha
30 Dimla Haldibari 7.71
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
361
1 2 3 4 5 6
35. Bara
Khankikharija
Citaldaha
29 Dimla Haldibari 36.8336. Barakhangir 28 Dimla Haldibari 30.5337. Nagarjikobari 31 Dimla Haldibari 33.4138. Kuchlibari 26 Patgram Mekliganj 5.7839. Kuchlibari 27 Patgram Mekliganj 2.0440. Bara Kuchlibari Fragment
of J.L.107
of P.S
Mekliganj
Patgram Mekliganj 4.3541. JamaldahaBalapukhari
6 Patgram Mekliganj 5.2442. Uponchowki
kuchlibari
115/2 Patgram Mekliganj 0.3243. Uponchowki
kuchlibari
7 Patgram Mekliganj 44.0444. Bhothnri 11 Patgram Mekliganj 36.8345. Balapukhari 5 Patgram Mekliganj 55.9146. Bara Khangir 4 Patgram Mekliganj 50.5147. Bara Khangir 9 Patgram Mekliganj 87.4248. Chhat Bogdokra 10 Patgram Mekliganj 41.749. Ratanpur 11 Patgram Mekliganj 58.9150. Bogdokra 12 Patgram Mekliganj 25.4951. Fulker Dabri Fragment
of J.L. 107
of P.S
Mekliganj
Patgram Mekliganj 0.88
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
362
1 2 3 4 5 6
52. Kharkharia 15 Patgram Mekliganj 60.7453. Kharkharia 13 Patgram Mekliganj 51.6254. Lotamari 14 Patgram Mekliganj 110.9255. Bhotbari 16 Patgram Mekliganj 205.4656. Komat
Changrabandha
16A Patgram Mekliganj 42.857. Komat
Changrabandha
17A Patgram Mekliganj 16.0158. Panisala 17 Patgram Mekliganj 137.6659. Dwarikamari
Khasbash
18 Patgram Mekliganj 36.560. Panisala 153/P Patgram Mekliganj 0.2761. Panisala 153/O Patgram Mekliganj 18.0162. Panisala 19 Patgram Mekliganj 64.6363. Panisala 21 Patgram Mekliganj 51.464. Lotamari 20 Patgram Mekliganj 283.5365. Lotamari 22 Patgram Mekliganj 98.8566. Dwarikamari 23 Patgram Mekliganj 39.5267. Dwarikamari 25 Patgram Mekliganj 45.7368. Chhat Bhothat 24 Patgram Mekliganj 56.1169. Baakata 131 Patgram Hathabhanga 22.3570. Baakata 132 Patgram Hathabhanga 11.9671. Baakata 130 Patgram Hathibhanga 20.4872. Bhogramguri 133 Patgram Hathibhanga 1.4473. Chenakata 134 Patgram Mekliganj 7.8174. Banskata 119 Patgram Mathabanga 413.8175. Banskata 120 Patgram Mathabanga 30.7576. Banskata 121 Patgram Mathabanga 12.1577. Banskata 113 Patgram Mathabanga 57.8678. Banskata 112 Patgram Mathabanga 315.0479. Banskata 114 Patgram Mathabanga 0.77
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
363
1 2 3 4 5 6
80. Banskata 115 Patgram Mathabanga 29.281. Banskata 122 Patgram Mathabanga 33.2282. Banskata 127 Patgram Mathabanga 12.7283. Banskata 128 Patgram Mathabanga 2.3384. Banskata 117 Patgram Mathabanga 2.5585. Banskata 118 Patgram Mathabanga 30.9886. Banskata 125 Patgram Mathabanga 0.6487. Banskata 126 Patgram Mathabanga 1.3988. Banskata 129 Patgram Mathabanga 1.3789. Banskata 116 Patgram Mathabanga 16.9690. Banskata 123 Patgram Mathabanga 24.3791. Banskata 124 Patgram Mathabanga 0.2892. Gotamari Chhit 135 Hatibandha Sitalkuchi 126.5993. Gotamari Chhit 136 Hatibandha Sitalkuchi 20.0294. Banapachai 151 Lalmonirhat Dinhata 217.2995. Banapachai
Bhitarkuthi
152 Lalmonirhat Dinhata 81.7196. Dasiar Chhara 150 Fulbari Dinhata 1643.4497. DakurhatDakinirkuthi
156 Kurigram Dinhata 14.2798. Kalamati 141 Bhurungamari Dinhata 21.2199. Bhahobganj 153 Bhurungamari Dinhata 31.58100. Baotikursa 142 Bhurungamari Dinhata 45.63101. Bara Coachulka 143 Bhurungamari Dinhata 39.99102. Gaochulka II 147 Bhurungamari Dinhata 0.9103. Gaochulka I 146 Bhurungamari Dinhata 8.92104. Dighaltari II 145 Bhurungamari Dinhata 8.81105. Dighaltari I 144 Bhurungamari Dinhata 12.31106. Chhoto
Garaljhora II
149 Bhurungamari Dinhata 17.85
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
364
1 2 3 4 5 6
107. Chhoto
Garaljhora I
148 Bhurungamari Dinhata 35.74108. 1 chhit without
name & JL No.
at the southern
and of JL No. 38
& southern and
of JL No. 39
(locally known
as Ashokabari *
)
Patgram Mathabhanga 3.5Enclaves with Fragmented Chhits
109. (i) Bewladanga 34 Haldibari Boda 862.46(ii) Bewladanga Fragment Haldibari Debiganj
110. (i) Kotbhajni 2 Haldibari Debiganj 2012.27(ii) Kotbhajni Fragment Haldibari Debiganj
(iii) Kotbhajni Fragment Haldibari Debiganj
(iv) Kotbhajni Fragment Haldibari Debiganj
111. (i) Dahala Khagrabri Haldibari Debiganj 2650.35(ii) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj
(iii) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj
(iv) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj ______________________________________________ Corrected vide 150th (54th) India-Bangladesh Boundary Conference held at Kolkata
from 29th September to 2nd October, 2002. * Corrected vide 152nd (56th) India-Bangladesh Boundary Conference held at
Kochbihar, India from 18th—20th September, 2003.
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
365
1 2 3 4 5 6
(v) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj
(vi) Dahala Fragment Haldibari Debiganj
17160.63The above given details of enclaves have been jointly compared and
reconciled with records held by India and Bangladesh during the IndoBangladesh Conference held at Calcutta during 9th—12th October, 1996 as well as
during joint field inspection at Jalpaiguri (West Bengal) Panchagarh (Bangladesh)
sector during 21—24 November, 1996.
Note: Name of enclave in Sl. No. 108 above has been identified as
Ashokabari by joint ground verification during field season 1996-97.
Brig. J.R. Peter
Director Land Records & Survey
(Ex-Officio) West Bengal, India &
Director, Eastern Circle Survey of
India, Calcutta.
Md. Shafi Uddin
Director-General, Land Records
and Surveys, Bangladesh.
B. EXCHANGEABLE BANGLADESH ENCLAVES IN INDIA WITH AREASl.
No.
Name of Chhits Lying within
Police station
W. Bengal
Lying within
Police station
Bangladesh
J.L.
No.
Area
in acres 1 2 3 4 5 6
A. Enclaves with independent chhits
1. Chhit Kuchlibari Mekliganj Patgram22 370.642. Chhit Land of
Kuchlibari
Mekliganj Patgram24 1.833. Balapukhari Mekliganj Patgram21 331.644. Chhit Land of Panbari
No. 2
Mekliganj Patgram20 1.13
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
366
1 2 3 4 5 6
5. Chhit Panbari Mekliganj Patgram 18 108.596. Dhabalsati Mirgipur Mekliganj Patgram 15 173.887. Bamandal Mekliganj Patgram11 2.248. Chhit Dhabalsati Mekliganj Patgram14 66.589. Dhabalsati Mekliganj Patgram 13 60.4510. Srirampur Mekliganj Patgram8 1.0511. Jote Nijjama Mekliganj Patgram 3 87.5412. Chhit Land of
Jagatber No. 3
Mathabhanga Patgram37 69.8413. Chhit Land of
Jagatber No.1
Mathabhanga Patgram 35 30.6614. Chhit Land of
Jagatber No. 2
Mathabhanga Patgram 36 27.0915. Chhit Kokoabari Mathabhanga Patgram47 29.4916. Chhit Bhandardaha Mathabhanga Patgram67 39.9617. Dhabalguri Mathabhanga Patgram52 12.518. Chhit Dhabalguri Mathabhanga Patgram53 22.3119. Chhit Land of
Dhabalguri No. 3
Mathabhanga Patgram70 1.3320. Chhit Land of
Dhabalguri No. 4
Mathabhanga Patgram71 4.5521. Chhit Land of
Dhabalguri No. 5
Mathabhanga Patgram 72 4.1222. Chhit Land of
Dhabalguri No. 1
Mathabhanga Patgram68 26.8323. Chhit Land of
Dhabalguri No. 2
Mathabhanga Patgram69 13.9524. Mahishmari Sitalkuchi Patgram54 122.7725. Bura Saradubi Sitalkuchi Hatibandha 13 34.96
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
367
1 2 3 4 5 6
26. Falnapur Sitalkuchi Patgram 64 505.5627. Amjhol Sitalkuchi Hatibandha 57 1.2528. Kismat Batrigachh Dinhata Kaliganj 82 209.9529. Durgapur Dinhata Kaliganj 83 20.9630. Bansua Khamar
Gitaldaha
Dinhata Lalmonirhat 1 24.5431. Poaturkuthi Dinhata Lalmonirhat 37 589.9432. Paschim Bakalir
Chhara
Dinhata Bhurungamari 38 151.9833. Madhya Bakalir
Chhara
Dinhata Bhurungamari 39 32.7234. Purba Bakalir
Chhara
Dinhata Bhurungamari 40 12.2335. Madhya Masaldanga Dinhata Bhurungamari 3 136.6636. Madhya Chhit
Masaldanga
Dinhata Bhurungamari 8 11.8737. Paschim Chhit
Masaldanga
Dinhata Bhurungamari 7 7.638. Uttar Masaldanga Dinhata Bhurungamari 2 27.2939. Kachua Dinhata Bhurungamari 5 119.7440. Uttar Bansjani Tufanganj Bhurungamari 1 47.1741. Chhat Tilai Tufanganj Bhurungamari 17 81.56B. Enclaves with Fragmented Chhits
42. (i) Nalgram Sitalkuchi Patgarm65 1397.34(ii) Nalgram
(Fragment)
Sitalkuchi Patgarm65
(iii) Nalgram
(Fragment)
Sitalkuchi Patgarm65
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
368
1 2 3 4 5 6
43. (i) Chhit Nalgram Sitalkuchi Patgarm66 49.5(ii) Chhit Nalgram
(Fragment)
Sitalkuchi Patgarm 66
44. (i) Batrigachh Dinhata Kaliganj 81 577.37(ii) Batrigachh
(Fragment)
Dinhata Kaliganj 81
(iii) Batrigachh
(Fragment)
Dinhata Phulbari 9
45. (i) Karala Dinhata Phulbari 9 269.91(ii) Karala (fragment) Dinhata Phulbari 9
(iii) Karala (fragment) Dinhata Phulbari 8
46. (i) Sipprasad Mustati Dinhata Phulbari 8 373.2(ii) Sipprasad Mustati
(Fragment)
Dinhata Phulbari 6
47. (i) Dakshin
Masaldanga
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6 571.38(ii) Dakshin
Masaldanga
(Fragment)
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6
(iii) Dakshin
Masaldanga
(Fragment)
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6
(iv) Dakshin
Masaldanga
(Fragment)
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6
(v) Dakshin
Masaldanga
(Fragment)
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6
(vi) Dakshin
Masaldanga
(Fragment)
Dinhata Bhurungamari 6
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Appendix I)
369
1 2 3 4 5 6
48. (i) Paschim
Masaldanga
Dinhata Bhurungamari 4 29.49(ii) Paschim
Masaldanga (Fragment)
Dinhata Bhurungamari 4
49. (i) Purba Chhit
Masaldanga
Dinhata Bhurungamari 10 35.01(ii) Purba Chhit
Masaldanga (Fragment)
Dinhata Bhurungamari 10
50. (i) Purba Masaldanga Dinhata Bhurungamari 11 153.89
(ii) Purba Masaldanga
(Fragment)
Dinhata Bhurungamari 11
51. (i) Uttar Dhaldanga Tufanganj Bhurungamari 14 24.98
(ii) Uttar Dhaldanga
(Fragment)
Tufanganj Bhurungamari 14
(iii) Uttar Dhaldanga
(Fragment)
Tufanganj Bhurungamari 14
Total Area 7,110.02The above given details of enclaves have been jointly compared and
reconciled with records held by India and Bangladesh during the IndoBangladesh Conference held at Calcutta during 9th—12th October, 1996 as well as
during joint field inspection at Jalpaiguri (West Bengal) – Panchagarh (Bangladesh)
sector during 21—24 November, 1996.
Brig. J.R. Peter
Director Land Records & Survey
(Ex officio) West Bengal, India &
Director, Eastern Circle Survey of
India, Calcutta.
Md. Shafi Uddin
Director General, Land Records
and Surveys, Bangladesh.
370
APPENDIX II 1THE CONSTITUTION (APPLICATION TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR)
ORDER, 2019
C.O. 272
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 370 of the
Constitution, the President, with the concurrence of the Government of State of
Jammu and Kashmir, is pleased to make the following Order:—1. (1) This Order may be called the Constitution (Application to Jammu
and Kashmir) Order, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force at once, and shall thereupon supersede the
Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 as amended
from time to time.
2. All the provisions of the Constitution, as amended from time to time,
shall apply in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the exceptions
and modifications subject to which they shall so apply shall be as follows:–
To article 367, there shall be added the following clause, namely:
“(4) For the purposes of this Constitution as it applies in relation
to the State of Jammu and Kashmir–
(a) references to this Constitution or to the
provisions thereof shall be construed as references to the
Constitution or the provisions thereof as applied in relation
to the said State;
(b) references to the person for the time being
recognized by the President on the recommendation of the
Legislative Assembly of the State as the Sadar-i-Riyasat of
Jammu and Kashmir, acting on the advice of the Council of
Ministers of the State for the time being in office, shall be
construed as references to the Governor of Jammu and
Kashmir;
(c) references to the Government of the said State
shall be construed as including references to the Governor
of Jammu and Kashmir acting on the advice of his Council
of Ministers; and
(d) in proviso to clause (3) of article 370 of this
Constitution, the expression “Constituent Assembly of the
State referred to in clause (2)” shall read “Legislative
Assembly of the State”.” ______________________________________________
1.Published with the Ministry of Law and Justice, (Legislative Department) notification
No. G.S.R. 551 (E), dated the 5th August, 2019, Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (i).
371
APPENDIX III 1DECLRATION UNDER ARTICLE 370(3) OF THE CONSTITUTIONC.O. 273
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (3) of article 370 read
with clause (1) of article 370 of the Constitution of India, the President, on the
recommendation of Parliament, is pleased to declare that, as from the 6th August, 2019, all clauses of the said article 370 shall cease to be operative
except the following which shall read as under, namely:—
“370. All provisions of this Constitution, as amended from time to
time, without any modifications or exceptions, shall apply to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir notwithstanding anything contrary contained in
article 152 or article 308 or any other article of this Constitution or any
other provision of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir or any law,
document, judgement, ordinance, order, by-law, rule, regulation,
notification, custom or usage having the force of law in the territory of
India, or any other instrument, treaty or agreement as envisaged under
article 363 or otherwise.”.
______________________________________________
1.Published with the Ministry of Law and Justice, (Legislative Department) notification
No. G.S.R. 562(E), dated the 6th August, 2019, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,
Section 3, Sub-section (i).